The Economist Democracy Index , Freedom House 's Freedom in the World index, and the Reporters Without Borders ' World Press Freedom Index . Early life and education Putin was born on 7 October 1952 in Leningrad, known as Saint Petersburg since 1991, in the Russian SFSR of the Soviet Union . He is the youngest of three children born to Vladimir Spiridonovich Putin and Maria Ivanovna Putina ( née Shelomova ). His grandfather, Spiridon Putin , was a personal cook to Vladimir Lenin and Joseph Stalin . Putin's birth was preceded by the deaths of two brothers: Albert, born in the 1930s, died in infancy, and Viktor, born in 1940, died of diphtheria and starvation in 1942 during the Siege of Leningrad by German forces in World War II . Putin's mother was a factory worker, and his father was a conscript in the Soviet Navy , serving in the submarine fleet in the early 1930s.

During the early stage of the Nazi invasion of the Soviet Union , his father served in the destruction battalion of the NKVD . Later, he was transferred to the regular army and was severely wounded in 1942. Putin's maternal grandmother was killed by the German occupiers of the Tver region in 1941, and his maternal uncles disappeared on the Eastern Front during World War II. Education Putin, c. 1960s On 1 September 1960, Putin started at School No. 193 at Baskov Lane, near his home. He was one of a few in his class of about 45 pupils who were not yet members of the Young Pioneer ( Komsomol ) organization.

At the age of 12, he began to practice sambo and judo.

In his free time, he enjoyed reading the works of Karl Marx , Friedrich Engels , and Lenin. Putin attended Saint Petersburg High School 281 with a German language immersion program. He is fluent in German and has given speeches and interviews in that language. Putin studied law at the Leningrad State University named after Andrei Zhdanov (now Saint Petersburg State University ) in 1970 and graduated in 1975. His thesis was on "The Most Favored Nation Trading Principle in International Law." While there, he was required to join the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU); he remained a member until it ceased to exist in 1991. Putin also met Anatoly Sobchak , an assistant professor who taught business law , who later became the co-author of the Russian constitution . Putin was influential in Sobchak's career in Saint Petersburg, and Sobchak was influential in Putin's career in Moscow.

In 1997, Putin received a degree in economics ( Candidate of Economic Sciences ) at the Saint Petersburg Mining University for a thesis on energy dependencies and their instrumentalisation in foreign policy. His supervisor was Vladimir Litvinenko , who in 2000 and again in 2004 managed his presidential election campaigns in St Petersburg. Igor Danchenko and Clifford Gaddy consider Putin to be a plagiarist according to Western standards. One book from which he copied entire paragraphs is the Russian-language edition of King and Cleland 's Strategic Planning and Policy (1978). Balzer wrote on the Putin thesis and Russian energy policy and concludes along with Olcott that "The primacy of the Russian state in the country's energy sector is non-negotiable", and cites the insistence on majority Russian ownership of any joint-venture, particularly since BASF signed the Gazprom Nord Stream - Yuzhno-Russkoye deal in 2004 with a 49–51 structure, as opposed to the older 50–50 split of BP 's TNK-BP project. Intelligence career Main article: Intelligence career of Vladimir Putin Putin in the KGB , c. 1980 In 1975, Putin joined the KGB and trained at the 401st KGB School in Okhta, Leningrad .

After training, he worked in the Second Chief Directorate ( counterintelligence ) before he was transferred to the First Chief Directorate , where he monitored foreigners and consular officials in Leningrad.

In September 1984, Putin was sent to Moscow for further training at the Yuri Andropov Red Banner Institute .

The Stasi identity card of Vladimir Putin, who worked in Dresden as a KGB liaison officer to the Stasi From 1985 to 1990, he served in Dresden , East Germany , using a cover identity as a translator.

While posted in Dresden, Putin served as one of the KGB's liaison officers to the Stasi secret police and was reportedly promoted to lieutenant colonel . According to the official Kremlin presidential site, the East German communist regime commended Putin with a bronze medal for "faithful service to the National People's Army ." Putin has publicly conveyed delight over his activities in Dresden, once recounting his confrontations with East Germany's anti-communist protestors of 1989 who attempted to occupy the city's Stasi buildings . "Putin and his colleagues were reduced mainly to collecting press clippings , thus contributing to the mountains of useless information produced by the KGB", Russian-American Masha Gessen wrote in their 2012 biography of Putin. His work was also downplayed by former Stasi spy chief Markus Wolf and Putin's former KGB colleague Vladimir Usoltsev. Journalist Catherine Belton wrote in 2020 that this downplaying was actually a cover for Putin's involvement in KGB coordination and support for the terrorist Red Army Faction (RAF), whose members frequently hid in East Germany with the support of the Stasi. Dresden was preferred as a "marginal" town with only a small presence of Western intelligence services. According to an anonymous source who claimed to be a former RAF member, at one of these meetings in Dresden, the militants presented Putin with a list of weapons that were later delivered to the RAF in West Germany. Klaus Zuchold, who claimed to be recruited by Putin, said that Putin handled a neo-Nazi , Rainer Sonntag, and attempted to recruit the author of a study on poisons. Putin reportedly met Germans to be recruited for wireless communications affairs, together with an interpreter. He was involved in wireless communications technologies in South-East Asia due to trips of German engineers, recruited by him, there and to the West. However, a 2023 investigation by Der Spiegel reported that the anonymous source had never been an RAF member and is "considered a notorious fabulist" with "several previous convictions, including for making false statements." According to Putin's official biography, during the fall of the Berlin Wall that began on 9 November 1989, he saved the files of the Soviet Cultural Center (House of Friendship) and of the KGB villa in Dresden for the official authorities of the would-be united Germany to prevent demonstrators, including KGB and Stasi agents, from obtaining and destroying them. He then supposedly burnt only the KGB files, in a few hours, but saved the archives of the Soviet Cultural Center for the German authorities. Nothing is written about the selection criteria during this burning; for example, regarding Stasi files or files of other agencies of the German Democratic Republic or of the USSR. He explained that many documents were left in Germany only because the furnace burst; however, many documents of the KGB villa were sent to Moscow.

After the collapse of the Communist East German government , Putin was to resign from active KGB service because of suspicions aroused regarding his loyalty during demonstrations in Dresden and earlier, although the KGB and the Soviet Army still operated in eastern Germany. He returned to Leningrad in early 1990 as a member of the "active reserves", where he worked for about three months with the International Affairs section of Leningrad State University , reporting to Vice-Rector Yuriy Molchanov , while working on his doctoral dissertation. There, he looked for new KGB recruits, watched the student body, and renewed his friendship with his former professor, Anatoly Sobchak , who was soon afterward elected the Mayor of Leningrad . Putin said that he resigned with the rank of lieutenant colonel on 20 August 1991, on the second day of the 1991 Soviet coup d'état attempt against Soviet president Mikhail Gorbachev . Putin stated: "As soon as the coup began, I immediately decided which side I was on", although he said that the choice was hard because he had spent the best part of his life with "the organs". Political career Main articles: Political career of Vladimir Putin and Vladimir Putin's rise to power Further information: Russia under Vladimir Putin , Putinism , List of speeches given by Vladimir Putin , and Politics of Russia Putin's political rise began in the Saint Petersburg administration (1990–1996), where in May 1990, he was appointed as an advisor on international affairs to Mayor Anatoly Sobchak . Shortly thereafter, in June 1991, he became the head of the Committee for External Relations of the Saint Petersburg Mayor's Office, overseeing the promotion of international ties, foreign investment, and the registration of business ventures. Though his tenure was marred by investigations from the city legislative council concerning discrepancies in asset valuation and the export of metals, Putin retained his position until 1996.

During the mid-1990s, he expanded his responsibilities in Saint Petersburg, serving as first deputy head of the city administration and leading the local branch of the pro-government political party Our Home Is Russia , as well as participating in advisory roles with regional newspapers. Bill Clinton , Vladimir Putin, his wife Ludmila Putina, and George H. W. Bush at the state funeral of Boris Yeltsin on 23 April 2007 Transitioning to the national scene in 1996, Putin was called to Moscow following the electoral defeat of Sobchak, where he assumed the role of Deputy Chief of the Presidential Property Management Department.

In this capacity, he was responsible for managing the transfer of former Soviet assets to the Russian Federation. His career in Moscow advanced rapidly with his appointment in 1997 as deputy chief of the Presidential Staff and later as chief of the Main Control Directorate of the same department. A pivotal moment came in 1998 when President Boris Yeltsin appointed him director of the FSB , Russia's primary intelligence and security agency.

In this role, Putin concentrated on reorganising and strengthening the agency after years of perceived decline, a period that would prove formative for his later approach to governance.

In 1999, Putin described communism as "a blind alley, far away from the mainstream of civilization".

By 1999, Zyuganov was the evident frontrunner for the first round of the pending 2000 presidential election. However, by the autumn of 1999, Vladimir Putin had overtaken Zyuganov as leading candidate in the polls.

On 13 May 2000, he issued a decree organizing the 89 federal subjects of Russia into seven administrative federal districts and appointed a presidential envoy responsible for each of those districts (whose official title is Plenipotentiary Representative).

In May 2000, Putin introduced seven federal districts for administrative purposes.

In January 2010, the 8th North Caucasus Federal District (shown here in purple) was split from the Southern Federal District .

In March 2014, the new 9th Crimean Federal District was formed after the annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation .

In July 2016, it was incorporated into the Southern Federal District. According to Stephen White , under the presidency of Putin, Russia made it clear that it had no intention of establishing a "second edition" of the American or British political system, but rather a system that was closer to Russia's own traditions and circumstances. Some commentators have described Putin's administration as a " sovereign democracy ". According to the proponents of that description (primarily Vladislav Surkov ), the government's actions and policies ought above all to enjoy popular support within Russia itself and not be directed or influenced from outside the country.

The practice of the system is characterized by Swedish economist Anders Åslund as manual management, commenting: "After Putin resumed the presidency in 2012, his rule is best described as 'manual management' as the Russians like to put it. Putin does whatever he wants, with little consideration for the consequences, with one important caveat.

During the Russian financial crash of August 1998, Putin learned that financial crises are politically destabilizing and must be avoided at all costs. Therefore, he cares about financial stability".

The period after 2012 saw mass protests against the falsification of elections, censorship, and the toughening of free assembly laws.

In July 2000, according to a law proposed by Putin and approved by the Federal Assembly of Russia , Putin gained the right to dismiss the heads of the 89 federal subjects.

In 2004, the direct election of those heads (usually called "governors") by popular vote was replaced with a system whereby they would be nominated by the president and approved or disapproved by regional legislatures. This was seen by Putin as a necessary move to stop separatist tendencies and get rid of those governors who were connected with organized crime. This and other government actions effected under Putin's presidency have been criticized by many independent Russian media outlets and Western commentators as anti-democratic.

During his first term in office, Putin opposed some of the Yeltsin-era business oligarchs , as well as his political opponents, resulting in the exile or imprisonment of such people as Boris Berezovsky , Vladimir Gusinsky , and Mikhail Khodorkovsky ; other oligarchs such as Roman Abramovich and Arkady Rotenberg are friends and allies with Putin. Putin succeeded in codifying land law and tax law and promulgated new codes on labour, administrative, criminal, commercial, and civil procedural law. Under Medvedev's presidency, Putin's government implemented some key reforms in the area of state security, the Russian police reform and the Russian military reform .

In 2000, Putin launched the "Programme for the Socio-Economic Development of the Russian Federation for the Period 2000–2010", but it was abandoned in 2008 when it was 30% complete. Fueled by the 2000s commodities boom including record-high oil prices , under the Putin administration from 2000 to 2016, an increase in income in USD terms was 4.5 times.

During Putin's first eight years in office, industry grew substantially, as did production, construction, real incomes, credit, and the middle class. A fund for oil revenue allowed Russia to repay the Soviet Union's debts by 2005. Russia joined the World Trade Organization in August 2012.

In 2006, Putin launched an industry consolidation programme to bring the main aircraft-producing companies under a single umbrella organization, the United Aircraft Corporation (UAC).

In September 2020, the UAC general director announced that the UAC will receive the largest-ever post-Soviet government support package for the aircraft industry in order to pay and renegotiate the debt. Putin, Gazprom CEO Alexey Miller , CNPC General Manager Zhou Jiping , and Chinese President Xi Jinping .

The Russian economy is heavily dependent on the export of natural resources such as oil and natural gas.

In 2014, Putin signed a deal to supply China with 38 billion cubic meters of natural gas per year. Power of Siberia , which Putin has called the "world's biggest construction project", was launched in 2019 and is expected to continue for 30 years at an ultimate cost to China of $400bn.

The ongoing financial crisis began in the second half of 2014 when the Russian ruble collapsed due to a decline in the price of oil and international sanctions against Russia . These events in turn led to loss of investor confidence and capital flight, although it has also been argued that the sanctions had little to no effect on Russia's economy.

In 2014, the Organized Crime and Corruption Reporting Project named Putin their Person of the Year for furthering corruption and organized crime. According to Meduza , Putin has since 2007 predicted on several occasions that Russia will become one of the world's five largest economies.

In 2013, he said Russia was one of the five biggest economies in terms of gross domestic product but still lagged behind other countries on indicators such as labour productivity.

By the end of 2023, Putin planned to spend almost 40% of public expenditures on defense and security. Environmental policy Main articles: Environment of Russia , Environmental issues in Russia , and Climate change in Russia In 2004, Putin signed the Kyoto Protocol treaty designed to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. However, Russia did not face mandatory cuts, because the Kyoto Protocol limits emissions to a percentage increase or decrease from 1990 levels and Russia's greenhouse-gas emissions fell well below the 1990 baseline due to a drop in economic output after the breakup of the Soviet Union, excluding emissions from land use, land-use change and forestry (LULUCF) .

In 2019 Russia joined the Paris Agreement . Russia's goal is to reach net zero by 2060, but its energy strategy to 2035 is mostly about burning more fossil fuels . Reporting military emissions is voluntary and, as of 2024, no data is available since before the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine . Putin described climate change as a concerning fact with big consequences for Russia. Though he expressed doubt that climate change was man-made, he stated that Russia will try to reduce man-made emissions with forests and "low-emission energy", such as natural gas , nuclear energy , and hydroenergy . He also argued that rich countries should provide finance and technology to those with less money for lower emissions. Energy expert Tatiana Lanshina described his policy as "mimicry of climate policy", accusing him of turning environmentalism into a tool of political influence. Religious policy Main article: Religion in Russia Putin with religious leaders of Russia, February 2001 Putin regularly attends the most important services of the Russian Orthodox Church on the main holy days and has established a good relationship with Patriarchs of the Russian Church, the late Alexy II of Moscow and the current Kirill of Moscow .

As president, Putin took an active personal part in promoting the Act of Canonical Communion with the Moscow Patriarchate , signed 17 May 2007, which restored relations between the Moscow-based Russian Orthodox Church and the Russian Orthodox Church Outside Russia after the 80-year schism. Under Putin, the Hasidic Federation of Jewish Communities of Russia became increasingly influential within the Jewish community, partly due to the influence of Federation-supporting businessmen mediated through their alliances with Putin, notably Lev Leviev and Roman Abramovich . According to the Jewish Telegraphic Agency , Putin is popular amongst the Russian Jewish community, who see him as a force for stability. Russia's chief rabbi , Berel Lazar , said Putin "paid great attention to the needs of our community and related to us with a deep respect".

In 2016, Ronald S. Lauder , the president of the World Jewish Congress , also praised Putin for making Russia "a country where Jews are welcome". Human rights organizations and religious freedom advocates have criticized the state of religious freedom in Russia.

In 2016, Putin oversaw the passage of legislation that prohibited missionary activity in Russia. Nonviolent religious minority groups have been repressed under anti-extremism laws, especially Jehovah's Witnesses . One of the 2020 amendments to the Constitution of Russia directly refers to belief in God . Military development Main article: 2008 Russian military reform Putin with Russia's long-serving Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu (left) and Chief of the General Staff Valery Gerasimov at the Vostok 2018 military exercise The resumption of long-distance flights of Russia's strategic bombers was followed by the announcement by Russian defense minister Anatoliy Serdyukov during his meeting with Putin on 5 December 2007, that 11 ships, including the aircraft carrier Kuznetsov , would take part in the first major navy sortie into the Mediterranean since Soviet times. Key elements of the reform included reducing the armed forces to a strength of one million, reducing the number of officers, centralizing officer training from 65 military schools into 10 systemic military training centers, creating a professional NCO corps, reducing the size of the central command, introducing more civilian logistics and auxiliary staff, elimination of cadre-strength formations, reorganizing the reserves, reorganizing the army into a brigade system, and reorganizing air forces into an airbase system instead of regiments. Russian postage stamp honoring a soldier killed in the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine According to the Kremlin, Putin embarked on a build-up of Russia's nuclear capabilities because of U.S. president George W. Bush 's unilateral decision to withdraw from the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty . To counter what Putin sees as the United States' goal of undermining Russia's strategic nuclear deterrent, Moscow has embarked on a program to develop new weapons capable of defeating any new American ballistic missile defense or interception system. Some analysts believe that this nuclear strategy under Putin has brought Russia into violation of the 1987 Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty . Accordingly, U.S. President Donald Trump announced the U.S. would no longer consider itself bound by the treaty's provisions, raising nuclear tensions between the two powers. This prompted Putin to state that Russia would not launch first in a nuclear conflict but that "an aggressor should know that vengeance is inevitable, that he will be annihilated, and we would be the victims of the aggression. We will go to heaven as martyrs". Putin has also sought to increase Russian territorial claims in the Arctic and its military presence there.

The new laws include the "foreign agents" law, which is widely regarded as overbroad by including Russian human rights organizations that receive some international grant funding, the treason law, and the assembly law, which penalizes many expressions of dissent. Human rights activists have criticized Russia for censoring speech of LGBT activists due to "the gay propaganda law" and increasing violence against LGBT+ people due to the law.

In 2020, Putin signed a law on labelling individuals and organizations receiving funding from abroad as "foreign agents".

The law is an expansion of "foreign agent" legislation adopted in 2012.

As of June 2020, per the Memorial Human Rights Center, there were 380 political prisoners in Russia, including 63 individuals prosecuted, directly or indirectly, for political activities (including Alexey Navalny) and 245 prosecuted for their involvement with one of the Muslim organizations that are banned in Russia. 78 individuals on the list, i.e., more than 20% of the total, are residents of Crimea.

As of December 2022, more than 4,000 people were prosecuted for criticizing the war in Ukraine under Russia's war censorship laws .

The Internet has attracted Putin's attention because his critics have tried to use it to challenge his control of information. Marian K. Leighton, who worked for the CIA as a Soviet analyst in the 1980s, says, "Having muzzled Russia's print and broadcast media, Putin focused his energies on the Internet." Robert W. Orttung and Christopher Walker reported that " Reporters Without Borders , for instance, ranked Russia 148 in its 2013 list of 179 countries in terms of freedom of the press. It particularly criticized Russia for the crackdown on the political opposition and the failure of the authorities to vigorously pursue and bring to justice criminals who have murdered journalists. Freedom House ranks Russian media as "not free", indicating that basic safeguards and guarantees for journalists and media enterprises are absent. About two-thirds of Russians use television as their primary source of daily news, while around 85% of Russians get most of their information from Russian state media.

In the early 2000s, Putin and his circle began promoting the idea in Russian media that they are the modern-day version of the 17th-century Romanov tsars who ended Russia's " Time of Troubles ", meaning they claim to be the peacemakers and stabilizers after the fall of the Soviet Union.

Since the 2022 Ukraine invasion, Putin has only once granted an interview to a Western journalist, namely Tucker Carlson in February 2024. Promoting conservatism Part of a series on Conservatism in Russia Ideologies Duginism Eurasianism Liberal Monarchism Tsarism Populist Putinism Traditionalist Zhirinovskyism Principles Authority Autocracy Bureaucracy Byzantinism Duty Familialism Imperialism Irredentism Law and order Orthodox values Nationalism All-Russian Christian Ultra Nuclear Orthodoxy Market intervention " Moscow, third Rome " Patriotism Reactionary Russian culture Russification Slavophilia Sobornost Social stratification Social order Sovereign democracy Statism History Great Russia Russian Empire " Orthodoxy, Autocracy, and Nationality " Zemstvo Pochvennichestvo Black Hundreds White movement White Army White émigré Russia under Vladimir Putin Activists Girkin Gubarev Dronov Krylov Kvachkov Malofeev Mizulina (Ekaterina) Mukhin Navalny (early) Okhlobystin Potkin Sterligov Commentators Boot Dugina Kandelaki Keosayan Kholmogorov Kiselyov Kots Krasovsky Mikhalkov Narochnitskaya Pegov Poddubny Popov Prosvirnin Puchkov Sheynin Simonyan Skabeyeva Solovei Solovyov (Vladimir) Tatarsky Intellectuals Aksakov (Ivan) Aksakov (Konstantin) Chudinova Dal Danilevsky Dostoevsky (Fyodor) Dostoevsky (Mikhail) Dugin Elias Galkovsky Grigoryev Hilferding Ilyin John Karaganov Karamzin Katkov Khomyakov Kireyevsky Kirill Koshelev Krylov Kurginyan Leontiev von Lilienfeld Obolensky Pobedonostsev Prokhanov Rasputin Rozanov Samarin Semyonov-Tyan-Shansky Shafarevich Shcherbatov Shevyryov Solovyov (Sergey) Solovyov (Vladimir) Solzhenitsyn Sorokin Strakhov Surkov Tarkovsky Tikhomirov Tikhon Trubetskoy Uvarov Vikulov von Wrangel Yazykov Yuryev Zhukovsky Politicians Alexander I Alexander III Alksnis Baburin Burlyayev Butina Dubrovin Durnovo Filimonov Furgal Fyodorov Gerashchenko Glazyev Govorukhin Gryzlov Kolchak Kornilov von Lilienfeld Luzhkov Makashov Malyshkin Medinsky Medvedev Milonov Mizulina (Yelena) Nicholas I Nicholas II Pikhno Pobedonostsev Putin Rodzianko Rogozin Rostopchin Rutskoy Sadovnichiy Shpak Shulgin Skokov Slutsky Stolypin Surkov Tolstoy (Dmitry) Tolstoy (Pyotr) Tyutchev von Ungern Uvarov Varennikov Vladimir Volodin Witte Yuryev Zhirinovsky Zhuravlyov Literature St Petersburg Dialogues (1821) The Organic Theory of Societies (1873) Sociology of Revolution (1925) The Gulag Archipelago (1973) Foundations of Geopolitics (1997) The Notre Dame de Paris Mosque (2005) The Fourth Political Theory (2009) Parties Active Civic Platform Democratic Party of Russia Eurasia Party Great Russia Liberal Democratic Party of Russia Monarchist Party of Russia Rodina Russian All-People's Union Union of Right Forces United Russia Defunct Russian Assembly Civic Initiative Democratic Choice of Russia For Truth Liberal Democratic Party of the Soviet Union National Republican Party of Russia National Socialist Russian Workers' Party Pamyat People's Union Union of October 17 Union of the Russian People Organisations All-Russia People's Front Club of Angry Patriots Congress of Russian Communities Decommunization Format18 Front of National Revolutionary Action Izborsky Club Krepostniki Male State Movement Against Illegal Immigration Nation and Freedom Committee National Alliance of Russian Solidarists National Democratic Alliance National Russian Liberation Movement Northern Brotherhood Northern Man Oprichny Dvor People's Militia named after Minin and Pozharsky Popular Resistance Association Right Bloc Rusich Group Russian All National Popular State Movement Russian All-National Union Russian Community Russians Russian Volunteer Corps Slavic Union Society.Future Union of Orthodox Banner-Bearers Union of the Russian People Media Active Nash Sovremennik Tsargrad TV Defunct Elementy Kievlyanin Kozma Minin Russkoye Znamya Znamya Related topics Anti-communism Anti-Islamism Anti-national sentiments American Chechen Jew Polish Romanian Tatar Turkish Ukrainian Opposition to LGBTQ rights Politics of Russia Liberalism Russia for Russians Serfdom in Russia Silovik Tsarist bureaucracy Conservatism portal Russia portal v t e Putin attends the Orthodox Christmas service in the village of Turginovo in Kalininsky District , Tver Oblast, 7 January 2016 Putin has promoted explicitly conservative policies in social, cultural, and political matters, both at home and abroad. Putin has attacked globalism and neoliberalism and is identified by scholars with Russian conservatism . Putin has promoted new think tanks that bring together like-minded intellectuals and writers. For example, the Izborsky Club, founded in 2012 by the conservative right-wing journalist Alexander Prokhanov , stresses (i) Russian nationalism, (ii) the restoration of Russia's historical greatness, and (iii) systematic opposition to liberal ideas and policies. Vladislav Surkov , a senior government official, has been one of the key economic consultants during Putin's presidency. Leonid Bershidsky analyzed Putin's interview with the Financial Times and concluded, "Putin is an imperialist of the old Soviet school, rather than a nationalist or a racist, and he has cooperated with, and promoted, people who are known to be gay".

In cultural and social affairs, Putin has collaborated closely with the Russian Orthodox Church . Patriarch Kirill of Moscow , head of the Church, endorsed his election in 2012 stating Putin's terms were like "a miracle of God". Steven Myers reports, "The church, once heavily repressed, had emerged from the Soviet collapse as one of the most respected ... Now Kiril led the faithful directly into an alliance with the state". Mark Woods, a Baptist Union of Great Britain minister and contributing editor to Christian Today , provides specific examples of how the Church has backed the expansion of Russian power into Crimea and eastern Ukraine. Some Russian Orthodox believers consider Putin a corrupt and brutal strongman or even a tyrant. Others do not admire him but appreciate that he aggravates their political opponents. Still others appreciate that Putin defends some although not all Orthodox teachings, whether he believes in them himself.

On abortion, Putin stated: "In the modern world, the decision is up to the woman herself". This put him at odds with the Russian Orthodox Church .

In 2020, he supported efforts to reduce the number of abortions instead of prohibiting it.

On 28 November 2023, during a speech to the World Russian People's Council , Putin urged Russian women to have "seven, eight, or even more children" and said "large families must become the norm, a way of life for all of Russia's people". Putin supported the 2020 Russian constitutional referendum , which passed and defined marriage as a relationship between one man and one woman in the Constitution of Russia . International sporting events Putin, FIFA president Gianni Infantino , French president Emmanuel Macron and Croatian former president Kolinda Grabar-Kitarović at the 2018 FIFA World Cup Final in Russia, as French forward Kylian Mbappé receives the best young player award In 2007, Putin led a successful effort on behalf of Sochi for the 2014 Winter Olympics and the 2014 Winter Paralympics , the first Winter Olympic Games to ever be hosted by Russia.

In 2008, the city of Kazan won the bid for the 2013 Summer Universiade ; on 2 December 2010, Russia won the right to host the 2017 FIFA Confederations Cup and 2018 FIFA World Cup , also for the first time in Russian history.

In October 2022, Putin described India and China as "close allies and partners". Under Putin, Russia has maintained positive relations with the Asian states of SCO and BRICS , which include China, India, Pakistan, and post-Soviet states of Central Asia. Putin and Prime Minister Shinzo Abe frequently met each other to discuss the Japan–Russia territorial disputes. Putin also voiced his willingness to construct a rail bridge between the two countries. Despite numerous meetings, no agreement was signed before Abe's resignation in 2020. Putin also made the first Russian or Soviet leader to visit North Korea, meeting Kim Jong Il in July 2000, shortly after a visit to South Korea. Putin with Chinese president Xi Jinping and other leaders at the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation summit in Uzbekistan on 16 September 2022 Putin made three visits to Mongolia and has enjoyed good relations with its neighbor. Putin and his Mongolian counterpart signed a permanent treaty on friendship between the two states in September 2019, further enhancing trade and cultural exchanges. Putin became the first Russian or Soviet leader to visit Indonesia in half a century in 2007, resulting in the signing of an arms deal.

In another visit, Putin commented on long-standing ties and friendship between Russia and Indonesia. Russia has also boosted relations with Vietnam after 2011, and with Afghanistan in the 2010s, giving military and economic aid.

The relations between Russia and the Philippines received a boost in 2016 as Putin forged closer bilateral ties with his Filipino counterpart, Rodrigo Duterte . Putin has good relations with Malaysia and its then Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad . Putin criticized violence in Myanmar against the Rohingya minorities in 2017.

Following the 2021 Myanmar coup d'état , Russia has pledged to boost ties with the Myanmar military regime.

In September 2007, Putin visited Indonesia, the first Russian leader to do so in over 50 years.

In the same month, Putin also attended the APEC meeting held in Sydney, Australia , where he met with Prime Minister John Howard and signed a uranium trade deal for Australia to sell uranium to Russia. This was the first visit by a Russian president to Australia. Putin again visited Australia for 2014 G20 Brisbane summit .

The two leaders met regularly, meeting face to face five or six times a year. Russian Prime Minister Dimitry Medvedev and Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao also met regularly, with Wen quipping in 2007 that "We didn't even use prepared speeches." : 497 China backed Russia in the Second Chechen War and regards to Russia's concerns of NATO expansion, while Russia backed China regarding the issues of Taiwan, Tibet and Xinjiang .

In December 2004, Putin criticized the Rose and Orange revolutions, saying: "If you have permanent revolutions, you risk plunging the post-Soviet space into endless conflict." Putin allegedly declared at a NATO-Russia summit in 2008 that if Ukraine joined NATO, Russia could contend to annex the Ukrainian East and Crimea .

At the summit, he told U.S. President George W. Bush that "Ukraine is not even a state!", while the following year, Putin referred to Ukraine as " Little Russia ".

Following the Revolution of Dignity in March 2014, the Russian Federation annexed Crimea . According to Putin, this was done because "Crimea has always been and remains an inseparable part of Russia." Putin hosted a meeting of the Russian-led military alliance, the Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO), in Moscow on 16 May 2022.

After the Russian annexation of Crimea, he said that Ukraine includes "regions of Russia's historic south" and "was created on a whim by the Bolsheviks ". He went on to declare that the February 2014 ousting of Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych had been orchestrated by the West as an attempt to weaken Russia.

In a July 2014 speech during the Russian-supported armed insurgency in Eastern Ukraine , Putin stated he would use Russia's "entire arsenal of available means" up to "operations under international humanitarian law and the right of self-defense" to protect Russian speakers outside Russia.

In late August 2014, Putin stated: "People who have their own views on history and the history of our country may argue with me, but it seems to me that the Russian and Ukrainian peoples are practically one people." After making a similar statement, in late December 2015, he stated: "the Ukrainian culture , as well as Ukrainian literature , surely has a source of its own".

In July 2021, he published a lengthy article On the Historical Unity of Russians and Ukrainians revisiting these themes, and saying the formation of a Ukrainian state hostile to Moscow was "comparable in its consequences to the use of weapons of mass destruction against us" —it was made mandatory reading for military-political training in the Russian Armed Forces.

During the Russo-Ukrainian war , Putin set out several conditions for a peace agreement , which included permanent Ukrainian neutrality, limits on the size of Ukraine's military, and the cession of four southeastern regions annexed by Russia in 2022 but not fully controlled by Russian forces. Ukraine rejected the terms, which Western officials and analysts said would effectively compromise the country's sovereignty and independence. Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskyy , German chancellor Angela Merkel , French president Emmanuel Macron , and Putin met in Paris on 9 December 2019 in the " Normandy Format " aimed at ending the war in Donbas .

In August 2008, Georgian President Mikheil Saakashvili attempted to restore control over the breakaway South Ossetia. However, the Georgian military was soon defeated in the resulting 2008 South Ossetia War after regular Russian forces entered South Ossetia and then other parts of Georgia, also opening a second front in the other Georgian breakaway province of Abkhazia with Abkhazian forces. Despite existing or past tensions between Russia and most of the post-Soviet states, Putin has followed the policy of Eurasian integration. Putin endorsed the idea of a Eurasian Union in 2011; the concept was proposed by the president of Kazakhstan in 1994.

On 18 November 2011, the presidents of Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Russia signed an agreement setting a target of establishing the Eurasian Union by 2015.

The Eurasian Union was established on 1 January 2015. Under Putin, Russia's relations have improved significantly with Uzbekistan, the second-largest post-Soviet republic after Ukraine. This was demonstrated in Putin's visit to Tashkent in May 2000, after lukewarm relations under Yeltsin and Islam Karimov , who had long distanced itself from Moscow.

When he first became president, relations were cautious, but after the 9/11 attacks , Putin quickly supported the U.S. in the war on terror , and the opportunity for partnership appeared. According to Stephen F. Cohen , the U.S. "repaid by further expansion of NATO to Russia's borders and by unilateral withdrawal from the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty ", but others pointed out the applications from new countries willing to join NATO was driven primarily by Russian behavior in Chechnya , Transnistria , Abkhazia , the 1991 Soviet coup attempt , as well as calls to restore USSR in its previous borders by prominent Russian politicians.

From 2003, when Russia strongly opposed the U.S. when it waged the Iraq War , Putin became ever more distant from the West, and relations steadily deteriorated. According to a Russian scholar Stephen F. Cohen , the narrative of the mainstream U.S. media, following that of the White House , became anti-Putin.

In an interview with Michael Stürmer , Putin said there were three questions which most concerned Russia and Eastern Europe: namely, the status of Kosovo, the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe and American plans to build missile defence sites in Poland and the Czech Republic, and suggested that all three were linked. His view was that concessions by the West on one of the questions might be met with concessions from Russia on another.

In 2003, relations between Russia and the United Kingdom deteriorated when the United Kingdom granted political asylum to Putin's former patron, oligarch Boris Berezovsky . This deterioration was intensified by allegations that the British were spying and making secret payments to pro-democracy and human rights groups.

The end of 2006 brought more strained relations in the wake of the death by polonium poisoning in London of former KGB and FSB officer Alexander Litvinenko , who became an MI6 agent in 2003.

In 2007, the crisis in relations continued with the expulsion of four Russian envoys over Russia's refusal to extradite former KGB bodyguard Andrei Lugovoi to face charges in the murder. Mirroring the British actions, Russia expelled UK diplomats and took other retaliatory steps.

In 2015, the British Government launched a public inquiry into Litvinenko's death, presided over by Robert Owen , a former British High Court judge.

The Owen report, published on 21 January 2016, stated, "The FSB operation to kill Mr. Litvinenko was probably approved by Mr Patrushev and also by President Putin".

The report outlined some possible motives for the murder, including Litvinenko's public statements and books about the alleged involvement of the FSB in mass murder , and what was "undoubtedly a personal dimension to the antagonism" between Putin and Litvinenko.

The months following Putin's Munich Speech were marked by tension and a surge in rhetoric on both sides of the Atlantic. Both Russian and American officials, however, denied the idea of a new Cold War . Putin publicly opposed plans for the U.S. missile shield in Europe and presented President George W. Bush with a counterproposal on 7 June 2007 which was declined. Russia suspended its participation in the Conventional Forces in Europe treaty on 11 December 2007. Putin opposed Kosovo's unilateral declaration of independence from Serbia on 17 February 2008, warning that it would destabilize the whole system of international relations. He described the recognition of Kosovo's independence by several major world powers as "a terrible precedent, which will de facto blow apart the whole system of international relations, developed not over decades, but over centuries", and that "they have not thought through the results of what they are doing.

At the end of the day it is a two-ended stick and the second end will come back and hit them in the face".

In March 2014, Putin used Kosovo's declaration of independence as a justification for recognizing the independence of Crimea , citing the so-called " Kosovo independence precedent ".

After the 9/11 attacks on the U.S. in 2001, Putin had good relations with the American President George W. Bush , and many Western European leaders. His "cooler" and "more business-like" relationship with German chancellor, Angela Merkel is often attributed to Merkel's upbringing in the former DDR , where Putin was stationed as a KGB agent. He had a very friendly and warm relationship with Prime Minister of Italy Silvio Berlusconi ; the two leaders often described their relationship as a close friendship, continuing to organize bilateral meetings even after Berlusconi's resignation in November 2011.

When Berlusconi died in 2023, Putin described him as an "extraordinary man" and a "true friend".

The NATO-led military intervention in Libya in 2011 prompted a widespread wave of criticism from several world leaders, including Putin, who said that the United Nations Security Council Resolution 1973 is "defective and flawed", adding: "It allows everything. It resembles medieval calls for crusades".

In late 2013, Russian-American relations deteriorated further when the United States canceled a summit for the first time since 1960 after Putin gave asylum to the American Edward Snowden , who had leaked massive amounts of classified information from the NSA.

In 2014, Russia was suspended from the G8 group as a result of its annexation of Crimea . Putin gave a speech highly critical of the United States, accusing them of destabilizing world order and trying to "reshape the world" to its own benefit.

In June 2015, Putin said that Russia has no intention of attacking NATO.

On 9 November 2016, Putin congratulated Donald Trump on becoming the 45th president of the United States.

In December 2016, US intelligence officials (headed by James Clapper ) quoted by CBS News stated that Putin approved the email hacking and cyber attacks during the U.S. election , against the Democratic presidential nominee, Hillary Clinton . A spokesman for Putin denied the reports. Putin has repeatedly accused Hillary Clinton, who served as U.S. secretary of state from 2009 to 2013, of interfering in Russia's internal affairs , and in December 2016, Clinton accused Putin of having a personal grudge against her. Putin has stated that U.S.–Russian relations, already at the lowest level since the end of the Cold War , have continued to deteriorate after Trump took office in January 2017. Putin and his wife Lyudmila meeting with Queen Elizabeth II , her husband Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh , and Prime Minister Tony Blair in 2005 On 4 March 2018, former double agent Sergei Skripal was poisoned with a Novichok nerve agent in Salisbury . Ten days later, the British government formally accused the Russian state of attempted murder, a charge which Russia denied.

After the UK expelled 23 Russian diplomats (an action which would later be responded to with a Russian expulsion of 23 British diplomats), British Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson said on 16 March that it was "overwhelmingly likely" Putin had personally ordered the poisoning of Skripal. Putin's spokesman Dmitry Peskov called the allegation "shocking and unpardonable diplomatic misconduct".

On 18 June 2020, The National Interest published a nine-thousand-word essay by Putin, titled "The Real Lessons of the 75th Anniversary of World War II".

In the essay, Putin criticizes the Western historical view of the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact as the start of World War II , stating that the Munich Agreement was the beginning.

On 21 February 2023, Putin suspended Russia's participation in the New START nuclear arms reduction treaty with the United States.

On 25 March, President Putin announced the stationing of tactical nuclear weapons in Belarus. Russia would maintain control of the weapons. President Putin told Russian TV: "There is nothing unusual here either. Firstly, the United States has been doing this for decades. They have long deployed their tactical nuclear weapons on the territory of their allied countries." In August 2024, Putin pardoned American journalist Evan Gershkovich , opposition figures Vladimir Kara-Murza , Ilya Yashin , and others in a prisoner swap with Western countries.

The 2024 Ankara prisoner exchange was the most extensive between Russia and United States since the end of the Cold War, involving the release of 26 people.

In September 2008, Russia sent Tupolev Tu-160 bombers to Venezuela to carry out training flights.

At a press conference after the summit Putin said that "all our ( Caspian ) states have the right to develop their peaceful nuclear programmes without any restrictions". Putin was quoted as describing Iran as a "partner", although he expressed concerns over the Iranian nuclear programme .

In April 2008, Putin became the first Russian president to visit Libya. Putin condemned the 2011 foreign military intervention in Libya, referring to the UN resolution as "defective and flawed", and added, "It allows everything. It resembles medieval calls for crusades". Upon the death of Muammar Gaddafi , Putin called it as "planned murder" by the US, saying: "They showed to the whole world how he (Gaddafi) was killed", and "There was blood all over. Is that what they call a democracy?" From 2000 to 2010, Russia sold around $1.5 billion worth of arms to Syria, making Damascus Russia's seventh-largest client.

During the Syrian civil war, Russia threatened to veto any sanctions against the Syrian government, and continued to supply arms to its regime. Putin opposed any foreign intervention in the Syrian civil war.

In June 2012, in Paris, he rejected the statement of French president François Hollande who called on Bashar al-Assad to step down. Putin echoed Assad's argument that anti-regime militants were responsible for much of the bloodshed. He also talked about previous NATO interventions and their results, and asked, "What is happening in Libya, in Iraq? Did they become safer? Where are they heading? Nobody has an answer".

On 11 September 2013, The New York Times published an op-ed by Putin urging caution against US intervention in Syria and criticizing American exceptionalism . Putin subsequently helped to arrange for the destruction of Syria's chemical weapons .

In 2015, he took a stronger pro-Assad stance and mobilized military support for the regime . Some analysts have summarized Putin as being allied with Shias and Alawites in the Middle East. Putin ordered Russian intervention to support his ally, Assad, to undermine the U.S.-led international order.

As a result, Russia increased its influence in the Eastern Mediterranean by strengthening its control over the Tartus Naval Base and becoming an operator of the Khmeimim Air Base .

In 2017, Putin dispatched Russian PMCs to back the Touadéra regime in the Central African Republic Civil War , gaining a permanent military presence in return.

The first Russia-Africa Summit was held in October 2019 in Sochi , Russia, co-hosted by Putin and Egyptian president Abdel Fattah el-Sisi .

The meeting was attended by 43 heads of state and government from African countries.

In October 2019, Putin visited the United Arab Emirates, where six agreements were struck with Abu Dhabi Crown Prince Mohammed bin Zayed . One of them included shared investments between Russian sovereign wealth fund and the Emirati investment fund Mubadala .

The two nations signed deals worth over $1.3bn in the energy, health, and advanced technology sectors.

On 22 October 2021, Putin highlighted the "unique bond" between Russia and Israel during a meeting with Israeli prime minister Naftali Bennett . Putin with Iranian president Hassan Rouhani and Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdoğan , September 2018 Putin met with the president of the African Union, Macky Sall , to discuss grain deliveries, June 2022.

The war in Ukraine contributed to the 2022–2023 food crises . Putin with Syrian president Ahmed al-Sharaa , 28 January 2026 Public image Main article: Public image of Vladimir Putin Polls and rankings In a June 2007 public opinion survey, Putin's approval rating was 81%, the second-highest of any leader in the world that year.

In January 2013, at the time of the 2011–2013 Russian protests , Putin's rating fell to 62%, the lowest since 2000.

In a context of increased diplomatic isolation and international sanctions on Russian officials prompted by the Russo-Ukrainian war, Putin's approval rating reached 87% in August 2014.

In June 2015, Putin's approval rating climbed to 89%, an all-time high. Observers saw Putin's high approval ratings in 2010s as a consequence of improvements in living standards, and Russia's reassertion on the world scene during his presidency.

The director of the Levada Center stated in 2015 that drawing conclusions from Russian poll results or comparing them to polls in democratic states was irrelevant, as there is no real political competition in Russia, where, unlike in democratic states, Russian voters are not offered any credible alternatives and public opinion is primarily formed by state-controlled media, which promotes those in power and discredits alternative candidates. Putin's performance in reining in corruption is unpopular among Russians. Newsweek reported in 2017 that a poll "indicated that 67% held Putin personally responsible for high-level corruption". Corruption is a significant problem in Russia .

In October 2018, two-thirds of Russians surveyed agreed that "Putin bears full responsibility for the problems of the country", which has been attributed to a decline in a popular belief in " good tsar and bad boyars ", a traditional attitude towards justifying failures at the top of the ruling hierarchy in Russia.

In January 2019, the percentage of Russians trusting Putin hit a then-historic low—33%.

In May 2020, amid the COVID crisis, Putin's approval rating was 68%, when respondents were presented a list of names (closed question), and 27% when respondents were expected to name politicians they trust (open question). This has been attributed to continued post-Crimea economic stagnation but also an apathetic response to the pandemic crisis in Russia.

Following the Russian invasion of Ukraine in 2022, state-controlled TV, where most Russians get their news, presented the invasion as a "special military operation" and liberation mission, in line with the government's narrative.

The Russian censorship apparatus Roskomnadzor ordered the country's media to employ information only from state sources or face fines and blocks.

The Russian media was banned from using the words "war", "invasion" or "aggression" to describe the invasion, with media outlets being blocked as a result.

In March 2022, 97% of Ukrainians said they had an unfavorable view of Putin, and 98% of Ukrainians—including 82% of ethnic Russians living in Ukraine—said they did not believe any part of Ukraine was rightfully part of Russia.

In late February 2022, a survey conducted by the independent research group Russian Field found that 59% of respondents supported the "special military operation" in Ukraine.

In late February and mid-March 2022 two polls surveyed Russians' sentiments about the "special military operation" in Ukraine.

The results were obtained by Radio Liberty . 71% of Russians polled said that they supported the "special military operation" in Ukraine. A poll published on 30 March in Russia saw Putin's approval rating jump, from 71% in February, to 83%. However, experts warned that the figures may not accurately reflect the public mood, as the public tends to rally around leaders during war and some may be hiding their true opinions, especially with the Russian 2022 war censorship laws prohibiting dissemination of "fake information" about the military. Many respondents do not want to answer pollsters' questions for fear of negative consequences.

When researchers commissioned a survey on Russians' attitudes to the war, 29,400 out of 31,000 refused to answer.

The Levada Center's director stated that early feelings of "shock and confusion" were being replaced with the belief that Russia was being besieged and that Russians must rally around their leader.

The Kremlin's analysis concluded that public support for the war was broad but not deep, and that most Russians would accept anything Putin labeled a victory.

In 2007, the tabloid Komsomolskaya Pravda published a huge photograph of a shirtless Putin vacationing in the Siberian mountains under the headline "Be Like Putin". Tatiana Mikhailova opines that virility is an aspect of the image of the Father of the Nation , which Putin wants to create. She refers to, as an example of the success of this image building attempt, a 2006 incident in which Putin lifted the shirt of a boy to kiss his stomach without permission – which did not cause much reaction in Russia even though, according to Mikhailova, it was unprecedented and transgressive by Russian standards and would have caused outrage in any other country (media reports note that there was widespread reaction in Russia and abroad, though). Numerous Kremlinologists have accused Putin of seeking to create a cult of personality around himself, an accusation that the Kremlin has denied. Some of Putin's activities have been criticised for being staged; outside of Russia, his macho image has been the subject of parody. Putin's height has been estimated by Kremlin insiders to be between 155 and 165 centimetres (5 feet 1 inch and 5 feet 5 inches) tall but is usually given at 170 centimetres (5 feet 7 inches). There are many songs about Putin, and Putin's name and image are widely used in advertisements and product branding. Among the Putin-branded products are Putinka vodka, the PuTin brand of canned food, the Gorbusha Putina caviar , and a collection of T-shirts with his image. Public recognition in the West In 2007, he was the Time Person of the Year .

In 2015, he was No. 1 on the Time's Most Influential People List . Forbes ranked him the World's Most Powerful Individual every year from 2013 to 2016. He was ranked the second-most-powerful individual by Forbes in 2018 the last year the list has been published.

In Germany, the word " Putinversteher " (female form "Putinversteherin") is a neologism and a political buzzword ( Putin + verstehen ), which literally translates "Putin understander", i.e., "one who understands Putin". It is a pejorative reference to politicians and pundits who express empathy to Putin and may also be translated as "Putin-empathizer". Putinisms Putin has produced many aphorisms and catch-phrases known as putinisms . Many of them were first made during his annual Q&A conferences, where Putin answered questions from journalists and other people in the studio, as well as from Russians throughout the country, who either phoned in or spoke from studios and outdoor sites across Russia. Putin is known for his often tough and sharp language, often alluding to Russian jokes and folk sayings. Putin sometimes uses Russian criminal jargon (known as " fenya " in Russian), albeit not always correctly. Assessments Z symbol on a billboard reads Russian: За Путина ( lit. ' For Putin ' ), 24 September 2022 Assessments of Putin's character as a leader have evolved during his long presidency. His shifting of Russia towards autocracy and weakening of the system of representative government advocated by Boris Yeltsin has met with criticism. Russian dissidents and western leaders now frequently characterise him as a dictator. Others have offered favourable assessments of his impact on Russia. Otto von Habsburg , the last crown prince of Austria-Hungary and former Member of the European Parliament , was an early critic of Putin.

In a newspaper interview in 2002 and in two speeches in 2003 and 2005, he warned of Putin as an "international threat", that he was "cruel and oppressive", and a "stone cold technocrat". Putin was described in 2015 as a "dictator" by political opponent Garry Kasparov , and as the "Tsar of corruption" in 2016 by opposition activist and blogger Alexei Navalny . He was described as a "bully" and "arrogant" by former U.S. secretary of state Hillary Clinton , and as "self-centered" by the Dalai Lama .

In 2015, opposition politician Boris Nemtsov said that Putin was turning Russia into a "raw materials colony" of China. Former U.S. secretary of state Henry Kissinger wrote in 2014 that the West has demonized Putin. Egon Krenz , former leader of East Germany, said the Cold War never ended, adding: "After weak presidents like Gorbachev and Yeltsin, it is a great fortune for Russia that it has Putin". Many Russians credit Putin for reviving Russia's fortunes. Former Soviet Union leader Mikhail Gorbachev, while acknowledging the flawed democratic procedures and restrictions on media freedom during the Putin presidency, said that Putin had pulled Russia out of chaos at the end of the Yeltsin years, and that Russians "must remember that Putin saved Russia from the beginning of a collapse". Chechen Republic head and Putin supporter, Ramzan Kadyrov , stated prior to 2011 that Putin saved both the Chechen people and Russia. Russia has suffered democratic backsliding during Putin's tenure. Freedom House has listed Russia as being "not free" since 2005. Experts do not generally consider Russia to be a democracy, citing purges and jailing of political opponents, curtailed press freedom, and the lack of free and fair elections.

In 2004, Freedom House warned that Russia's "retreat from freedom marks a low point not registered since 1989, when the country was part of the Soviet Union".

The Economist Intelligence Unit has rated Russia as "authoritarian" since 2011, whereas it had previously been considered a " hybrid regime " (with "some form of democratic government" in place). According to political scientist Larry Diamond, writing in 2015, "no serious scholar would consider Russia today a democracy".

Following the jailing of the anti-corruption blogger and activist Alexei Navalny in 2018, Forbes wrote: "Putin's actions are those of a dictator...

As a leader with failing public support, he can only remain in power by using force and repression that gets worse by the day".

In November 2021, The Economist also noted that Putin had "shifted from autocracy to dictatorship".

In a 2015 opinion article for The Wall Street Journal , former U.S. ambassador to Germany John Kornblum disputed Putin's claim that Russia had been betrayed by the West after the Cold War. Kornblum argued that Western governments had not intended to humiliate Russia and had observed the agreements reached with Moscow in the early 1990s.

In her 2017 book Red Hangover: Legacies of Twentieth-Century Communism , Kristen Ghodsee argued that the triumphalist attitudes of Western powers at the end of the Cold War , and the fixation with linking all leftist and socialist political ideals with the horrors of Stalinism , allowed neoliberalism to fill the void, undermined democratic institutions and reforms, left a trail of economic misery, unemployment, hopelessness and rising inequality throughout the former Eastern Bloc . This includes Russia, helping fuel the rise of Putin's extremist right-wing nationalism.

After the 2022 invasion of Ukraine Protest sign in front of the Russian embassy in Finland. Putin has been labeled a war criminal by international law experts.

Following mounting civilian casualties during the Russian invasion of Ukraine, U.S. president Joe Biden called Putin a war criminal and "murderous dictator".

In the 2022 State of the Union Address , Biden said that Putin had "badly miscalculated".

The Ukrainian envoy to the United Nations , Sergiy Kyslytsya likened Putin to Adolf Hitler . Latvian prime minister Krisjanis Karins also likened the Russian leader to Hitler, saying he was "a deluded autocrat creating misery for millions" and that "Putin is fighting against democracy (...) If he can attack Ukraine, theoretically it could be any other European country". Lithuania's foreign minister, Gabrielius Landsbergis , stated, "The battle for Ukraine is a battle for Europe. If Putin is not stopped there, he will go further." French President Emmanuel Macron said Putin was "deluding himself". French foreign minister Jean-Yves Le Drian denounced him as "a cynic and a dictator". Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau called Putin "a lying, murderous dictator". UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson also labelled Putin a "dictator" who had authorised "a tidal wave of violence against a fellow Slavic people". Several authors and academics, such as Michael Hirsh , described Putin as a "messianic" Russian nationalist and Eurasianist .

In a March 2025 essay in The Atlantic , Franklin Foer argued that Putin's rule had had consequences beyond Russia, including for democratic development in neighboring states and for relations between Russia and the West. Electoral history Main article: Electoral history of Vladimir Putin Vladimir Putin has been nominated and elected as President of Russia all five times since 2000, typically under an independent banner.

In the most recent 2024 Russian presidential election, Putin achieved 88% of the popular vote. There were reports of irregularities at this election, including ballot stuffing and coercion. Russian authorities claimed that in occupied areas of Ukraine's Zaporizhzhia and Kherson regions, Putin won 88.12% and 92.83% of votes.

In Chechnya , Putin won 98.99% of the vote. Personal life Family Main article: Family of Vladimir Putin Putin and Lyudmila Putina during their wedding on 28 July 1983 On 28 July 1983, Putin married Lyudmila Shkrebneva , and they lived together in East Germany from 1985 to 1990. They have two daughters, Maria Putina , born on 28 April 1985 in Leningrad (now Saint Petersburg), and Yekaterina Putina , born on 31 August 1986 in Dresden, East Germany (now Germany). An investigation by Proekt published in November 2020 alleged that Putin has another daughter, Elizaveta, also known as Luiza Rozova, (born in March 2003), with Svetlana Krivonogikh . Elizaveta studied in Paris under the name Elizaveta Olegovna Rudnova.

In April 2008, the Moskovsky Korrespondent reported that Putin had divorced Lyudmila and was engaged to marry Olympic gold medalist Alina Kabaeva , a former rhythmic gymnast and Russian politician.

The story was denied, and the newspaper was shut down shortly thereafter. Putin and Lyudmila continued to make public appearances together as spouses, while the status of his relationship with Kabaeva became a topic of speculation.

In 2012, Putin reported an income of 3.6 million rubles ($270,000). Putin has been photographed wearing several expensive wristwatches, collectively valued at $700,000, nearly six times his annual salary. Putin has been known on occasion to give watches valued at thousands of dollars as gifts, for example a watch identified as a Blancpain to a Siberian boy he met while on vacation in 2009, and another similar watch to a factory worker the same year. Putin's close associate Arkady Rotenberg is mentioned in the Panama Papers , pictured in 2018. According to Russian opposition politicians and journalists, Putin secretly possesses a multi-billion-dollar fortune via successive ownership of stakes in several Russian companies. According to one editorial in The Washington Post , "Putin might not technically own these 43 aircraft, but, as the sole political power in Russia, he can act like they're his". An RIA Novosti journalist argued that " intelligence agencies ... could not find anything". These contradictory claims were analyzed by Polygraph.info , which looked at several reports by Western ( Anders Åslund estimate of $100–160 billion) and Russian ( Stanislav Belkovsky estimated of $40 billion) analysts, CIA (estimate of $40 billion in 2007) as well as counterarguments of Russian media. Polygraph concluded: The name of Putin does not appear in any of the records, and Putin denied his involvement with the company. However, various media have reported on three of Putin's associates on the list. According to the Panama Papers leak, close trusted associates of Putin own offshore companies worth US$2 billion in total. Süddeutsche Zeitung regards the possibility of Putin's family profiting from this money as plausible. According to the paper, the US$2 billion had been "secretly shuffled through banks and shadow companies linked to Putin's associates", such as construction billionaires Arkady and Boris Rotenberg , and Bank Rossiya , previously identified by the U.S. State Department as being treated by Putin as his personal bank account, had been central in facilitating this. It concludes that "Putin has shown he is willing to take aggressive steps to maintain secrecy and protect communal assets". A significant proportion of the money trail leads to Putin's best friend Sergei Roldugin .

Although a musician, and in his own words, not a businessman, it appears he has accumulated assets valued at $100m, and possibly more. It has been suggested he was picked for the role because of his low profile. There have been speculations that Putin, in fact, owns the funds, and Roldugin just acted as a proxy. Garry Kasparov said that " controls enough money, probably more than any other individual in the history of human race". Residences Official government residences Putin receives Barack Obama at his residence in Novo-Ogaryovo in 2009.

As president and prime minister, Putin has lived in numerous official residences throughout the country. These residences include: the Moscow Kremlin , Novo-Ogaryovo in Moscow Oblast , Gorki-9 near Moscow, Bocharov Ruchey in Sochi , Dolgiye Borody in Novgorod Oblast , and Riviera in Sochi.

In August 2012, critics of Putin listed the ownership of 20 villas and palaces, nine of which were built during Putin's 12 years in power. Personal residences Soon after Putin returned from his KGB service in Dresden, East Germany, he built a dacha in Solovyovka on the eastern shore of Lake Komsomolskoye on the Karelian Isthmus in Priozersky District of Leningrad Oblast , near St. Petersburg.

After the dacha burned down in 1996, Putin built a new one identical to the original and was joined by a group of seven friends who built dachas nearby.

In 1996, the group formally registered their fraternity as a co-operative society, calling it Ozero ("Lake") and turning it into a gated community . A massive Italianate-style mansion costing an alleged US$1 billion and dubbed " Putin's Palace " is under construction near the Black Sea village of Praskoveevka.

In 2012, Sergei Kolesnikov , a former business associate of Putin's, told the BBC's Newsnight programme that he had been ordered by Deputy Prime Minister Igor Sechin to oversee the building of the palace. He also said that the mansion, built on government land and sporting three helipads, plus a private road paid for from state funds and guarded by officials wearing uniforms of the official Kremlin guard service, have been built for Putin's private use.

On 19 January 2021, two days after Alexei Navalny was detained by Russian authorities upon his return to Russia, a video investigation by him and the Anti-Corruption Foundation (FBK) was published, accusing Putin of using fraudulently obtained funds to build the estate for himself in what he called "the world's biggest bribe".

In the investigation, Navalny said that the estate is 39 times the size of Monaco and costs over 100 billion rubles ($1.35 billion) to construct. It also showed aerial footage of the estate via a drone and a detailed floorplan of the palace that Navalny said was given by a contractor, which he compared to photographs from inside the palace that were leaked onto the Internet in 2011. He also detailed an elaborate corruption scheme allegedly involving Putin's inner circle that allowed Putin to hide billions of dollars to build the estate.

Since the prelude to the Russian invasion of Ukraine , Putin prefers to travel in an armored train to flying. Pets Main article: Pets of Vladimir Putin Putin's pet, named Verni, was a birthday gift from Gurbanguly Berdimuhamedow , president of Turkmenistan, during a meeting in Sochi in October 2017. Putin has received five dogs from various national leaders: Konni , Buffy, Yume, Verni and Pasha. Konni died in 2014.

When Putin first became president, the family had two poodles, Tosya and Rodeo. They reportedly stayed with his ex-wife Lyudmila after their divorce. Religion Putin and wife Lyudmila in New York at a service for victims of the September 11 attacks , 16 November 2001 Putin is Russian Orthodox . His mother was a devout Christian who attended the Russian Orthodox Church; his father was an atheist .

Although his mother kept no icons at home, she attended church regularly, despite government persecution of her faith at that time. His mother secretly baptized him as a baby, and she regularly took him to services. According to Putin, his religious awakening began after a serious car crash involving his wife in 1993, and a life-threatening fire that burned down their dacha in August 1996. Shortly before an official visit to Israel, Putin's mother gave him his baptismal cross, telling him to get it blessed. Putin has stated, "I did as she said and then put the cross around my neck. I have never taken it off since".

When asked in 2007 whether he believes in God, he replied, "There are things I believe, which should not in my position, at least, be shared with the public at large for everybody's consumption because that would look like self-advertising or a political striptease ". Putin's rumoured confessor is Russian Orthodox bishop Tikhon Shevkunov .

The sincerity of his Christianity has been rejected by his former advisor Sergei Pugachev . Sports Putin practicing judo in Tokyo, Japan, in September 2000 Putin watches football and supports FC Zenit Saint Petersburg . He also displays an interest in ice hockey and bandy , and played in a star-studded hockey game on his 63rd birthday. Putin has been practicing judo since he was 11, before switching to sambo at the age of fourteen. He won competitions in both sports in Leningrad (now Saint Petersburg). He was awarded eighth dan of the black belt in 2012, becoming the first Russian to achieve the status. He was rewarded an eighth-degree karate black belt in 2014. He co-authored a book titled Learn Judo with Vladimir Putin in Russian (2000), and Judo: History, Theory, Practice in English (2004). Benjamin Wittes , a black belt in taekwondo and aikido and editor of Lawfare , has disputed Putin's martial arts skills, stating that there is no video evidence of Putin displaying any real noteworthy judo skills.

The statement was made because of increasing unconfirmed media speculation about Putin's health. Burns had previously been U.S. ambassador to Russia , and had personally observed Putin for over two decades, including a personal meeting in November 2021. A Kremlin spokesperson also dismissed rumours of Putin's bad health.

The Russian political magazine Sobesednik ( Russian : Собеседник ) alleged in 2018 that Putin had a sensory room installed in his private residence in the Novgorod Oblast .

The White House , as well as Western generals, politicians, and political analysts , have questioned Putin's mental health after two years of isolation during the COVID-19 pandemic.

In April 2022, London tabloid newspaper The Sun asserted that based on video footage Putin may have Parkinson's disease . This speculation, which has not been supported by medical professionals, has spread in part due to Russia's invasion of Ukraine, which many saw as an irrational act.

The New York Times . New York City. Archived from the original on 9 May 2012 . Retrieved 3 October 2021 . ^ a b Zakharov, Andrey; Badanin, Roman ; Rubin, Mikhail (25 November 2020). "An investigation into how a close acquaintance of Vladimir Putin attained a piece of Russia" . maski-proekt.media . Proekt . Archived from the original on 25 November 2020 . Retrieved 5 October 2021 . ^ a b Campbell, Matthew (26 May 2019). "Kremlin silent on reports Vladimir Putin and Alina Kabaeva, his 'secret first lady', have had twins" .

The Times . Retrieved 3 October 2021 . ^ a b Besson, Sylvain; Odehnal, Bernhard (30 April 2022). "Russisches Staatsgeheimnis – Putins Sohn wurde im Tessin geboren" . Der Bund (in German) . Retrieved 1 May 2022 . ^ "8th Dan attributed to Vladimir Putin" . eju.net. 10 April 2012 . Retrieved 29 January 2026 . ^ "Vladimir Putin Earns Honorary 8th Dan Kyokushin" . cfts-karate.co.uk. 6 April 2016 . Retrieved 29 January 2026 . ^ "Timeline: Vladimir Putin – 20 tumultuous years as Russian President or PM" . Reuters . 9 August 2019. Archived from the original on 29 November 2021 . Retrieved 29 November 2021 . ^ The Guardian . Archived from the original on 18 November 2022 . Retrieved 15 November 2022 .

After serving his first two terms in office, Putin assumed the post of prime minister in 2008 due to term limits but nonetheless remained the country's de facto leader "Russia: Freedom in the World 2022 Country Report" . Freedom House . 2022. Archived from the original on 14 November 2022. He served two four-year presidential terms from 2000 to 2008, then remained the de facto paramount leader while working as prime minister until he returned to the presidency in 2012, violating the spirit if not the letter of the constitution's two-term limit Данила Гальперович (2 February 2019). "Четвертый срок Путина: как пройдет и чем кончится?" . Голос Америки (in Russian). Archived from the original on 15 November 2022. Vladimir Gelman (2022). "Putin's Era" . Routledge Handbook of Russian Politics and Society . Routledge . pp. 22– 32. doi : 10.4324/9781003218234-4 . ISBN 978-1-00-321823-4 . Archived from the original on 15 November 2022. Sergey Radchenko; Baurzhan Rakhmetov (6 August 2020). "Putin Is Ruling Russia Like a Central Asian Dictator" . Foreign Policy . Archived from the original on 6 August 2020.

In office since 2000, when he was first elected president, Putin has ruled Russia continuously for two decades. (He did step down briefly, taking the position of prime minister from 2008 to 2012, but no one had any illusions as to who actually remained in charge) Reuters and The Washington Post have called him the de facto leader since 31 December 1999: David Filipov; Andrew Rot (6 December 2017). "Vladimir Putin says he'll run for reelection. Nobody is surprised" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on 17 October 2019. Putin has been the de facto leader of Russia since Boris Yeltsin resigned on New Year's Eve 1999 Guy Faulconbridge (3 May 2022). "Putin puts West on notice: Moscow can terminate exports and deals" . Reuters . Archived from the original on 7 November 2022 . Retrieved 15 November 2022 . Putin, Russia's paramount leader since 1999, signed <...> ^ a b Putin: Russia's Choice , (Routledge 2007), by Richard Sakwa , Chapter 9. ^ a b Judah, Ben, Fragile Empire: How Russia Fell In and Out of Love with Vladimir Putin , Yale University Press , 2013, p. 17 ^ "Fighting in volatile Chechnya kills 13 rebels, police: agency" . Reuters . 24 January 2013. Archived from the original on 9 September 2019 . Retrieved 11 November 2023 . ^ "Putin Warns 'Mistakes' Could Bring Back '90s Woes" . Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. 17 October 2011. Archived from the original on 9 May 2021 . Retrieved 11 November 2023 . ^ Kramer, Andrew E. (18 February 2020). "Pessimistic Outlook in Russia Slows Investment, and the Economy" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 15 February 2022 . Retrieved 22 March 2023 . ^ "Putin signs law allowing him 2 more terms as Russia's leader" . AP News . 5 April 2021 . Retrieved 28 December 2025 . ^ "Putin signs law allowing him to run for two more terms as Russian President" . CNN . 6 April 2021 . Retrieved 28 December 2025 . ^ "Situation in Ukraine: ICC judges issue arrest warrants against Vladimir Vladimirovich Putin and Maria Alekseyevna Lvova-Belova" . International Criminal Court . Archived from the original on 17 March 2023 . Retrieved 24 April 2023 . ^ "International court issues war crimes warrant for Putin" . AP News . 17 March 2023. Archived from the original on 17 March 2023 . Retrieved 24 March 2023 . ^ "At least 22 million fake votes cast for Putin in presidential election" . Novaya Gazeta . 19 March 2024. ISSN 1606-4828 . Wikidata Q125026372 . {{ cite journal }} : CS1 maint: url-status ( link ) ^ "Исследование «Новой-Европа»: около половины голосов за Владимира Путина на президентских выборах были вброшены" . Novaya Gazeta (in Russian). 18 March 2024. Archived from the original on 18 March 2024 . Retrieved 18 March 2024 . ^ "Putin 2024 - Meduza breaks down the evidence pointing to the most fraudulent elections in modern Russian history" . Meduza . 20 March 2024. Wikidata Q125025516 . {{ cite journal }} : CS1 maint: url-status ( link ) ^ "Russian Presidential Vote an 'Imitation,' Election Watchdog Golos Says" .

The Moscow Times . 18 March 2024. Archived from the original on 18 March 2024 . Retrieved 19 March 2024 . ^ a b Gill, Graeme (2016). Building an Authoritarian Polity: Russia in Post-Soviet Times (hardback ed.). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-107-13008-1 . Archived from the original on 24 July 2018 . Retrieved 11 November 2023 . ^ a b Reuter, Ora John (2017).

The Origins of Dominant Parties: Building Authoritarian Institutions in Post-Soviet Russia (E-book ed.). Cambridge University Press. doi : 10.1017/9781316761649 . ISBN 978-1-316-76164-9 . Archived from the original on 11 December 2019 . Retrieved 24 July 2018 . ^ Frye, Timothy (2021). Weak Strongman: The Limits of Power in Putin's Russia . Princeton University Press . p. . ISBN 978-0-691-21246-3 . Archived from the original on 25 February 2022 . Retrieved 11 November 2023 . ^ "Prime Minister of the Russian Federation – Biography" . 14 May 2010. Archived from the original on 14 May 2010 . Retrieved 31 July 2015 . ^ "Putin says grandfather cooked for Stalin and Lenin" . Reuters . 11 March 2018. Archived from the original on 26 February 2022 . Retrieved 30 January 2021 . ^ Sebestyen, Victor (2018), Lenin the Dictator , London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson , p. 422, ISBN 978-1-4746-0105-4 ^ Barry, Ellen (27 January 2012). "At Event, a Rare Look at Putin's Life" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 28 January 2012 . Retrieved 27 March 2022 . ^ Pasha-Robinson, Lucy (9 October 2016). "Putin's brother died in Siege of Leningrad, which bears striking resemblance to Syrian crisis" . International Business Times . Archived from the original on 10 October 2016 . Retrieved 27 March 2022 . ^ Vladimir Putin; Nataliya Gevorkyan; Natalya Timakova; Andrei Kolesnikov (2000). First Person . trans. Catherine A. Fitzpatrick. PublicAffairs . p. 208 . ISBN 978-1-58648-018-9 . ^ First Person An Astonishingly Frank Self-Portrait by Russia's President Vladimir Putin Archived 12 March 2018 at the Wayback Machine The New York Times , 2000. ^ Putin's Obscure Path From KGB to Kremlin . Los Angeles Times , 19 March 2000. ^ a b c ( Sakwa 2008 , p. 3) ^ Sakwa, Richard. Putin Redux: Power and Contradiction in Contemporary Russia (2014), p. 2. ^ "Prime Minister" . Russia.rin.ru. Archived from the original on 11 February 2022 . Retrieved 24 September 2011 . ^ Truscott, Peter (2005). Putin's Progress: A Biography of Russia's Enigmatic President, Vladimir Putin . Pocket Books. p. 40. ISBN 978-0-7434-9607-0 . Archived from the original on 5 April 2023 . Retrieved 25 February 2022 – via Google Books. ^ "In Tel Aviv, Putin's German Teacher Recalls 'Disciplined' Student" . Haaretz . 26 March 2014. Archived from the original on 19 November 2015 . Retrieved 16 April 2016 . ^ "Russian President speaks at Reichstag" . www.youtube.com . 25 September 2001. ^ a b c d Hoffman, David (30 January 2000). "Putin's Career Rooted in Russia's KGB" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on 23 June 2019 . Retrieved 23 May 2021 . ^ Lynch, Allen. Vladimir Putin and Russian Statecraft , p. 15 (Potomac Books 2011). ^ Владимир Путин. От Первого Лица . Chapter 6 Archived 30 June 2009 at the Wayback Machine ^ Pribylovsky, Vladimir (2010). "Valdimir Putin" (PDF) . Власть – 2010 (60 биографий) (in Russian). Moscow: Panorama. pp. 132– 139. ISBN 978-5-94420-038-9 . Archived (PDF) from the original on 31 July 2013 . Retrieved 1 August 2010 . ^ Vartanov, Mikhail (28 March 2006). "Путина не смогли завалить 'чёрные рецензенты' " (in Russian). Gazeta.Ru . Archived from the original on 18 August 2016 . Retrieved 30 August 2022 . ^ "Russia's energy empire: Putin and the rise of Gazprom" . DW Documentary. YouTube. 3 February 2024. Archived from the original on 4 February 2024 . Retrieved 4 February 2024 . ^ a b Danchenko, Igor; Gaddy, Clifford (30 March 2006). "The Mystery of Vladimir Putin's Dissertation" (PDF) .

The Brookings Institution. Archived (PDF) from the original on 25 February 2024 . Retrieved 6 February 2024 . ^ Harley Balzer, "The Putin Thesis and Russian Energy Policy" Post-Soviet Affairs , 2005, 21, 3, pp. 210–225. ^ a b Rosenberg, Matt (12 August 2016). "When Was St. Petersburg Known as Petrograd and Leningrad?" . About.com. Archived from the original on 5 February 2017 . Retrieved 16 September 2016 . ^ ( Sakwa 2008 , pp. 8–9) ^ Chris Hutchins (2012). Putin . Troubador Publishing Ltd. p. 40. ISBN 978-1-78088-114-0 . Archived from the original on 11 November 2023 . Retrieved 19 January 2019 . But these were the honeymoon days and she was already expecting their first child when he was sent to Moscow for further training at the Yuri Andropov Red Banner Institute in September 1984 ...

At Red Banner, students were given a nom de guerre beginning with the same letter as their surname. Thus, Comrade Putin became Comrade Platov. ^ Andrew Jack (2005). Inside Putin's Russia: Can There Be Reform without Democracy? . Oxford University Press. p. 66. ISBN 978-0-19-029336-9 . Archived from the original on 11 November 2023 . Retrieved 19 January 2019 . He returned to work in Leningrad's First Department for intelligence for four and a half years, and then attended the elite Andropov Red Banner Institute for intelligence training before his posting to the German Democratic Republic in 1985. ^ Vladimir Putin; Nataliya Gevorkyan; Natalya Timakova; Andrei Kolesnikov (2000). First Person: An Astonishingly Frank Self-Portrait by Russia's President Vladimir Putin . Public Affairs. p. 53. ISBN 978-0-7867-2327-0 . Archived from the original on 11 November 2023 . Retrieved 19 January 2019 . I worked there for about four and a half years, and then I went to Moscow for training at the Andropov Red Banner Institute, which is now the Academy of Foreign Intelligence. ^ "Putin's Stasi spy ID pass found in Germany" . BBC News . 11 December 2018. Archived from the original on 24 March 2022 . Retrieved 8 April 2023 . ^ "Putin set to visit Dresden, the place of his work as a KGB spy, to tend relations with Germany" . International Herald Tribune . 9 October 2006. Archived from the original on 26 March 2009. ^ a b "The Man Without a Face: The Unlikely Rise of Vladimir Putin and Mr. Putin: Operative in the Kremlin — Central Intelligence Agency" . www.cia.gov . Archived from the original on 27 July 2014 . Retrieved 23 October 2020 . ^ "Putin's Stasi spy ID pass found in Germany" . BBC News . 11 December 2018. Archived from the original on 24 March 2022 . Retrieved 8 April 2023 . ^ a b Belton, Catherine (2020). "Did Vladimir Putin Support Anti-Western Terrorists as a Young KGB Officer?" . Politico . Archived from the original on 12 February 2022 . Retrieved 30 June 2020 . ^ Röbel, Sven; Tietze, Wolfgang (7 June 2023). "Were Vladimir Putin's Years in Germany Less Thrilling than the Stories?" . Der Spiegel . Archived from the original on 7 June 2023 . Retrieved 3 June 2023 . ^ "Vladimir Putin, The Imperialist" . Time . 10 December 2014. Archived from the original on 1 March 2022 . Retrieved 11 December 2014 . ^ Sakwa, Richard (2007). Putin : Russia's Choice (2nd ed.). Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge. p. 10. ISBN 978-0-415-40765-6 . Archived from the original on 11 November 2023 . Retrieved 11 June 2012 . ^ ( Sakwa 2008 , pp. 10–11) ^ ( Sakwa 2008 , p. 11) ^ Remick, David (3 August 2014). "Watching the Eclipse" .

The New Yorker . No. 11. Archived from the original on 5 January 2022 . Retrieved 3 August 2014 . ^ Simes, Dimitri K (1999).

After the Collapse . New York City: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 0-684-82716-6 . ^ "RUSSIAN ELECTION WATCH No. 4, November 1999" . www.belfercenter.org . Harvard University (John F. Kennedy School of Government). November 1999. Archived from the original on 30 October 2018 . Retrieved 29 October 2018 . ^ Hyde, Matthew (2001). "Putin's Federal Reforms and Their Implications for Presidential Power in Russia" . Europe-Asia Studies . 53 (5): 719– 743. doi : 10.1080/09668130120060242 . ISSN 0966-8136 . JSTOR 826367 . ^ White, Stephen (2010). "Classifying Russia's Politics".

In White, Stephen (ed.). Developments in Russian Politics 7 . New York: Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-230-22449-0 . ^ ( Sakwa 2008 , pp. 42–43) ^ Okara, Andrei (July–September 2007). "Sovereign Democracy: A New Russian Idea Or a PR Project?" (PDF) . Russia in Global Affairs . 5 (3). Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 April 2016. ^ Petrov, Nikolai (December 2005). "From Managed Democracy to Sovereign Democracy" (PDF) . Center for Political-Geographic Research. Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 October 2017 . Retrieved 28 March 2016 . ^ Surkov, Vladislav (7 February 2006). "Sovereignty is a Political Synonym of Competitiveness" . Archived from the original on 12 February 2008 . Retrieved 18 August 2016 . ^ Åslund, Anders (6 May 2019). "The Illusions of Putin's Russia" . Atlantic Council . Retrieved 16 June 2019 . ^ Lynch, Dov (2005). "The enemy is at the gate": Russia after Beslan . International Affairs 81 (1), 141–161. ^ Putin tightens grip on security , BBC News , 13 September 2004. ^ "Президентское фильтрование губернаторов оценили политики" . Radiovesti.ru. Archived from the original on 24 February 2013 . Retrieved 7 May 2012 . ^ Kramer, Andrew E. (22 April 2007). "50% Good News Is the Bad News in Russian Radio" .

The New York Times . Russia . Retrieved 24 September 2011 . ^ Masha Lipman; Anders Aslund (2 December 2004). "Russian Media Criticism of Vladimir Putin: Evidence and Significance" . Carnegie Endowment for International Peace . Retrieved 2 March 2010 . ^ "Arkady Rotenberg" . Forbes . 2013 . Retrieved 23 December 2013 . ^ Sharlet, Robert (2005). "In Search of the Rule of Law".

In White; Gitelman; Sakwa (eds.). Developments in Russian Politics . Vol. 6. Duke University Press. ISBN 978-0-8223-3522-1 . ^ Main, John. (2009). Russia country study guide : army and national . : Intl Business Pubns Usa. ISBN 978-1-4387-4042-3 . OCLC 946230798 . ^ Dubow, Ben (8 February 2022). "With Enemies Like Russia's Communists, Putin Doesn't Need Friends" . With Enemies Like Russia’s Communists, Putin Doesn’t Need Friends . Retrieved 28 October 2025 . ^ Guriyev, Sergey (16 August 2019). "20 Years of Vladimir Putin: The Transformation of the Economy" . Moscow Times . Retrieved 15 October 2020 . ^ Aris, Ben; Tkachev, Ivan (19 August 2019). "Long Read: 20 Years of Russia's Economy Under Putin, in Numbers" . Moscow Times . Retrieved 15 October 2020 . ^ Becker, Torbjörn (15 March 2018). "The Russian Economy Under Putin (So Far)" (PDF) . freepolicybriefs.org . Free Network. p. 3 . Retrieved 16 October 2020 . ^ Malofeeva, Katya; Brenton, Tim (15 August 2007). "Putin's Economy – Eight Years On" . Russia Profile. Archived from the original on 18 October 2014 . Retrieved 23 April 2008 . ^ Iikka. Korhonen et al.

The challenges of the Medvedev era Archived 20 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine . Bank of Finland's Institute for Economies in Transition, 24 June 2008. ^ "WTO | Accessions: Russian Federation" . wto.org . Retrieved 14 March 2019 . ^ "Владимир Путин учредил открытое акционерное общество "Объединенная авиастроительная корпорация" " . Президент России (in Russian). 21 February 2006 . Retrieved 16 October 2020 . ^ Zvereva, Polina (11 October 2009). "State-sponsored consolidation" . Russia & CIS Observer . 3 (26). ^ "UAC to receive largest post Soviet govt support package | CAPA" . centreforaviation.com . Retrieved 16 October 2020 . ^ "Объединенная авиастроительная корпорация задолжала банкам полтриллиона рублей" . vesti.ru (in Russian). 1 September 2020 . Retrieved 16 October 2020 . ^ "Western sanctions push Russia's energy revenues to lowest since 2020" . Reuters . 3 February 2023. ^ "Russia, China launch gas pipeline 'Power of Siberia' " . Deutsche Welle . 2 December 2019 . Retrieved 8 November 2020 . ^ "Sanctions boost Russian economic resilience" . Deutsche Welle. 24 March 2017. Archived from the original on 31 March 2017. ^ Movchan, Andrey (28 March 2017). "How the Sanctions Are Helping Putin" . Politico . Retrieved 5 August 2023 . ^ Kitroeff, Natalie Natalie; Weisenthal, Joe (16 December 2014). "Here's Why the Russian Ruble Is Collapsing" . Bloomberg L.P. ^ "OCCRP 2014 Person of the Year" . Retrieved 31 December 2014 . ^ "Vladimir Putin named Person of the Year for 'innovation' in 'organised crime' " . International Business Times . 3 January 2015. ^ "When will Russia become the world's fifth biggest economy? Don't ask Vladimir Putin" . Meduza . Retrieved 9 May 2018 . ^ "Putin approves big military spending hikes for Russia's budget" . Reuters . 27 November 2023. ^ "Putin Ratifies Kyoto Protocol on Emissions" .

The New York Times . 6 November 2004. p. A1 . Retrieved 16 October 2022 . ^ Tony Johnson. "G8's Gradual Move toward Post-Kyoto Climate Change Policy" . Council on Foreign Relations. Archived from the original on 29 December 2009 . Retrieved 2 March 2010 . ^ "Report on the technical review of the fourth biennial report of the Russian Federation" (PDF) . ^ "Russia gives definitive approval to Paris climate accord" . Reuters . 23 September 2019 . Retrieved 24 May 2021 . ^ "Nationally determined contribution of the Russian Federation" (PDF) . ^ "Does Russia have a climate plan to reduce carbon emissions?" . euronews . 18 March 2022 . Retrieved 26 March 2022 . ^ "The Military Emissions Gap – Tracking the long war that militaries are waging on the climate" . Retrieved 14 September 2024 . ^ "Valdai Discussion Club meeting" . Presidential Executive Office 2024 . 7 November 2024 . Retrieved 15 December 2024 . ^ Lanshina, Tatiana. "Climate control: How Russia turned environmentalism into a tool of political influence" .

The Insider . Retrieved 15 December 2024 . ^ "The President of Russia attended the ceremonial signing of the Act on Canonical Communion that was held in the Cathedral of Christ the Saviour" (Press release). Embassy of Russia in Ottawa . 17 May 2007. Archived from the original on 11 December 2008 . Retrieved 2 October 2008 . ^ No love lost , Yossi Mehlman, Haaretz , 11 December 2005. ^ Phyllis Berman Lea Goldman, (15 September 2003). "Cracked De Beers" . Forbes . ^ Krichevsky, Lev (10 October 2011). " "In Putin's return, Russian Jews see stability". Jewish Telegraphic Agency" .

The Jerusalem Post . Retrieved 22 June 2013 . ^ "Ronald S. Lauder: Russia's fight against anti-Semitism isn't just good for Jews – it's good for Russia as well" . World Jewish Congress . 1 November 2016 . Retrieved 1 November 2016 . ^ a b "Missionaries are struggling to work under new Russia law banning proselytizing" .

The Washington Post . 2016. ^ "Russia's mysterious campaign against Jehovah's Witnesses" . ABC News . Retrieved 4 March 2022 . ^ "Constitution of the Russia Federation" . Council of Europe . 4 February 2021 . Retrieved 5 March 2022 . ^ Guy Faulconbridge Russian navy to start sorties in Mediterranean . Reuters. 5 December 2007. ^ Начало встречи с Министром обороны Анатолием Сердюковым (in Russian). Kremlin.ru. 5 December 2007. Archived from the original on 8 June 2008. ^ "Reforming The Russian Military: Problems And Prospects" . Archived from the original on 4 May 2018 . Retrieved 12 August 2011 . ^ Majumdar, Dave (1 March 2018). "Russia's Nuclear Weapons Buildup Is Aimed at Beating U.S. Missile Defenses" .

The National Interest . US . Retrieved 26 October 2018 . ^ a b Hurlbert, Heather (26 October 2018). "Russia Violated an Arms Treaty. Trump Ditched It, Making the Nuclear Threat Even Worse" . National Interest . New York . Retrieved 26 October 2018 . ^ "Aggressors Will Be Annihilated, We Will Go to Heaven as Martyrs, Putin Says" . Moscow Times . Russia. 19 October 2018 . Retrieved 26 October 2018 . ^ William J. Broad (19 February 2008). "Russia's Claim Under Polar Ice Irks American" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 27 July 2011 . ^ Adrian Blomfield (11 June 2008). "Russia plans Arctic military build-up" .

The Daily Telegraph . London. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022 . Retrieved 27 July 2011 . ^ Mia Bennett (4 July 2011). "Russia, Like Other Arctic States, Solidifies Northern Military Presence" . Foreign Policy Blogs . Foreign Policy Association . Retrieved 27 July 2011 . ^ "Laws of Attrition: Crackdown on Russia's Civil Society after Putin's Return to the Presidency" (PDF), Human Rights Watch report, 24 April 2013. ^ Russia: Worst Human Rights Climate in Post-Soviet Era, Unprecedented Crackdown on Civil Society Human Rights Watch Summary, 24 April 2013. ^ North, Andrew (4 May 2016). " 'We'll cut off your head': open season for LGBT attacks in Kyrgyzstan" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 21 June 2017 . ^ Luhn, Alec (1 September 2013). "Russian anti-gay law prompts rise in homophobic violence" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 21 June 2017 . ^ Keating, Joshua (9 October 2014). "The Chilling Effects of Russia's Anti-Gay Law, One Year Later" . Slate . ISSN 1091-2339 . Retrieved 21 June 2017 . ^ "Russia's LGBT Youth Victimized by 'Gay Propaganda' Law" .

The Moscow Times . 14 September 2015 . Retrieved 21 June 2017 . ^ "Putin Signs Controversial 'Foreign Agent' Law Expansion" . Moscow Times . 30 December 2020. ^ Odynova, Alexandra (31 December 2020). "Putin ends 2020 by tightening the legal noose on press and individual freedoms" . CBS News . ^ "Списки преследуемых" . Правозащитный центр «Мемориал» . 4 October 2017 . Retrieved 11 October 2021 . ^ Council, Russian-speaking Community (14 June 2021). "Russia's Political Prisoners Directory" . American Russian-Speaking Association for Civil & Human Rights . Retrieved 11 October 2021 . ^ Weir, Fred (5 December 2022). "In Russia, critiquing the Ukraine war could land you in prison" . CSMonitor.com . ^ Scott Gehlbach, "Reflections on Putin and the Media". Post-Soviet Affairs 26#1 (2010): 77–87. ^ "How Putin Silences Dissent: Inside the Kremlin's Crackdown". Foreign Affairs . Vol. 95#1. 2016. p. 38. ^ Andrei Soldatov and Irina Borogan, The Red Web: The Struggle Between Russia's Digital Dictators and the New Online Revolutionaries (2015). ^ Marian K. Leighton, "Muzzling the Russian Media Again." (2016): 820–826. ^ Robert W. Orttung and Christopher Walker (21 February 2013). "Russian Analytical Digest No.123" (PDF) . Forschungsstelle Osteuropa, Bremen and Center for Security Studies. p. 2 to 5. ISSN 1863-0421 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 September 2016 . Retrieved 22 February 2026 . ^ Goncharenko, Roman (16 February 2022). "Russia's TV war against Ukraine" . Deutsche Welle . ^ Stengel, Richard (20 May 2022). "Putin May Be Winning the Information War Outside of the U.S. and Europe" . TIME . Archived from the original on 18 August 2022 . Retrieved 16 June 2023 . ^ Levin, Eve (Fall 2011). "Muscovy and Its Mythologies". Kritika: Explorations in Russian & Eurasian History . 12 (4): 773– 788. doi : 10.1353/kri.2011.0058 . ISSN 1531-023X . S2CID 159746900 . ^ Troianovski, Anton ; Rutenberg, Jim ; Sonne, Paul (6 February 2024). "Tucker Carlson Says His Putin Interview Will Be Shown on Thursday" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 8 February 2024 . ^ Sergei Prozorov, "Russian conservatism in the Putin presidency: The dispersion of a hegemonic discourse." Journal of Political Ideologies 10#2 (2005): 121–143. ^ Marlene Laruelle, "The Izborsky Club, or the New Conservative Avant‐Garde in Russia." Russian Review 75#4 (2016): 626–644. ^ Sirke Mäkinen, "Surkovian narrative on the future of Russia: making Russia a world leader." Journal of Communist Studies and Transition Politics 27#2 (2011): 143–165. ^ Bershidsky, Leonid (28 June 2019). "Why Putin Sounds Alt-Right Though He Really Isn't" . Moscow Times . MoscowTimes LLC . Retrieved 25 August 2020 . ^ Gerlach, Julia; Töpfer, Jochen, eds. (2014).

The Role of Religion in Eastern Europe Today . Springer. p. 135. ISBN 978-3-658-02441-3 . ^ Myers (2016).

The New Tsar . Knopf Doubleday Publishing. p. 404. ISBN 978-0-345-80279-8 . ^ Woods, Mark (3 March 2016). "How the Russian Orthodox Church is backing Vladimir Putin's new world order" . Christian Today . ^ Mattingly, Terry (19 September 2016). "Dear editors at The New York Times: Vladimir Putin is a Russian, but Putin is not Russia" . getreligion.org . Get Religion . Retrieved 27 February 2022 . ... divide these people into at least three groups ... , a response to Higgins, Andrew (13 September 2016). "In Expanding Russian Influence, Faith Combines With Firepower" .

The New York Times . ^ "Guess What? Vladimir Putin Is a Pro-Choice Champion" . Moscow Times . 14 December 2017. ^ "Putin the Pro-Choice Champion – IWMF" . iwmf.org . 20 September 2018. ^ "Putin Orders Government to Improve Abortion Prevention Efforts" . Moscow Times . 27 October 2020. ^ Tom Porter (29 November 2023). "Putin is urging women to have as many as 8 children after so many Russians died in his war with Ukraine" . Business Insider . Retrieved 29 November 2023 . ^ Kramer, Andrew E. (3 March 2020). "Putin Proposes Constitutional Ban on Gay Marriage" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 8 June 2020 . ^ Roth, Andrew (2 March 2020). "Putin submits plans for constitutional ban on same-sex marriage" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 8 June 2020 . ^ "Putin Proposes to Enshrine God, Heterosexual Marriage in Constitution" . Moscow Times . 2 March 2020 . Retrieved 8 June 2020 . ^ "Sochi speech" . Media.kremlin.ru . 2007. Archived from the original (WMV) on 10 July 2007. ^ " Sochi 2014: Putin declares gay athletes welcome ", BBC (28 October 2013). ^ Anishchuk, Alexei. (21 December 2021). "Putin says foreign foes use radical Islam to weaken Russia" . Reuters . Retrieved 22 September 2025 . ^ "Putin blames West for tensions since end of Cold War" . Reuters . 21 December 2021. Archived from the original on 6 December 2022 . Retrieved 22 September 2025 . ^ a b c d Snow, Philip (2023). China and Russia: Four Centuries of Conflict and Concord . New Haven: Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-16665-1 . ^ Anna Borshchevskaya. Putin's War in Syria. I.B. Tauris Press. 2022. pp. 44–46. ^ Anna Borshchevskaya. Putin's War in Syria. I.B. Tauris Press. 2022. p. 44. ^ Lester Grau and Charles Bartles, The Russian Way of War , p. 29. ^ Kotkin, Stephen (3 October 2018). "Technology and Governance in Russia: Possibilities" . Hoover Institution . Retrieved 25 August 2020 . ^ Putin, Vladimir (24 December 2012). "For Russia, deepening friendship with India is a top foreign policy priority" .

The Hindu . ISSN 0971-751X . Archived from the original on 26 February 2022 . Retrieved 26 February 2022 . ^ "India, Russia sign new defence deals" . BBC News . 24 December 2012 . Retrieved 22 June 2013 . ^ Tamkin, Emily (8 July 2020). "Why India and Russia Are Going to Stay Friends" . Foreign Policy . Retrieved 2 February 2021 . ^ "India, China allies stressed for dialogue on Ukraine conflict, says Putin" . Hindustan Times . 15 October 2022. ^ "Russia's 'Pivot to Asia' and the SCO" .

The Diplomat . 21 July 2015 . Retrieved 2 January 2020 . ^ Kulik, Sergey (7 July 2015). "Russia and the BRICS: Priorities of the Presidency" . Council of Councils . Archived from the original on 4 July 2020 . Retrieved 2 January 2020 . ^ Sharkov, Damien (18 July 2018). "Russia wants to build a rail bridge to Japan, linking Tokyo to Europe" . Newsweek . Retrieved 4 March 2022 . ^ Abiru, Taisuke. "Japan-Russia Relations in the Post-Abe Era" . Carnegie Moscow Center . Retrieved 4 March 2022 . ^ "Resetting Japan-Russia Relations" .

The Diplomat . Retrieved 4 March 2022 . ^ Kirk, Don (20 July 2000). "Putin Is Acclaimed On Pyongyang Visit : After Decades of Sullen Isolation, North Korea Emerges as a Key Player" .

The New York Times . ^ "Russia, Mongolia Sign New Treaty To Bring Partnership To 'Whole New Level' " . Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty . 3 September 2019. ^ "Putin promises infrastructure investment in Mongolia" . France 24. 4 September 2019 . Retrieved 4 March 2022 . ^ Peter Walker (6 September 2007). "Putin signs Indonesia arms deal" .

The Guardian . ^ "Putin: Russia and Indonesia are Linked by Long-standing and Close Ties" . Sekretariat Kabinet Republik Indonesia . 19 May 2016 . Retrieved 4 March 2022 . ^ Thayer, Carlyle (9 October 2012). "The Russia–Vietnam comprehensive partnership" . East Asia Forum . Retrieved 4 March 2022 . ^ Hasrat-Nazimi, Waslat (2 March 2016). "Russia's new role in Afghanistan" . Deutsche Welle . Retrieved 4 March 2022 . ^ "Hamid Karzai and the Russia Connection" .

The Diplomat . 3 November 2017. ^ "President Putin bestows Order of Friendship on Filipino" . Arab News . 22 November 2019. ^ England, Charlotte (28 November 2016). "Rodrigo Duterte tells Vladimir Putin: 'I just want to be friends' " .

The Independent . ^ Bowie, Nile (10 September 2019). "The ties that bind Mahathir to Moscow" . Asia Times . ^ "Putin Condemns Myanmar Violence After Mass Rally in Chechnya" .

The Moscow Times . 5 September 2017 . Retrieved 4 March 2022 . ^ "Russia working closely with post-coup Myanmar on military supplies – exporter" . Reuters . 1 July 2021. ^ "Russia Courts Indonesia" . Brtsis.com. 12 October 2007. Archived from the original on 12 October 2007 . Retrieved 24 September 2011 . ^ Coorey, Phillip (7 September 2007). "Putin and Howard Sign Uranium Deal" .

The Sydney Morning Herald . Retrieved 14 October 2014 . ^ Tony Abbott condemns Russian 'invasion of Ukraine' as bullying ; The Guardian ; 29 August 2014 ^ Tony Abbott discusses MH17 with Vladimir Putin at APEC; Kremlin says Russian president was not 'shirtfronted' ; Australian Broadcasting Corporation; 12 November 2014 ^ The Latest: Putin denies Russia responsible for MH17 downing ; apnews.com; 26 May 2014 ^ Standish, Reid (1 September 2020). "China, Russia Deepen Their Ties Amid Pandemic, Conflicts With The West" . Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty . Retrieved 2 February 2021 . ^ "AFP: Chinese leader Xi, Putin agree key energy deals" . ^ Buckley, Chris; Myers, Steven Lee (7 March 2022). " 'No Wavering': After Turning to Putin, Xi Faces Hard Wartime Choices for China" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 10 March 2022 . ^ Kramer, Andrew E. (31 August 2008). "Russia Claims Its Sphere of Influence in the World" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 3 August 2021 . ^ Safire, William (22 May 1994). "On Language – The Near Abroad" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 3 August 2021 . ^ Polish head rejects Putin attack , BBC News (24 December 2004). ^ "After Russian Invasion of Georgia, Putin's Words Stir Fears about Ukraine" , Kyiv Post (30 November 2010). ^ Bohm, M. Ukraine Is Putin's Favorite Vassal . Moscow Times . 25 December 2013. ^ Walker, Shaun (4 March 2014). "Russian takeover of Crimea will not descend into war, says Vladimir Putin" .

The Guardian . London . Retrieved 4 March 2014 . ^ Yoon, Sangwon; Krasnolutska, Daryna; Choursina, Kateryna (4 March 2014). "Russia Stays in Ukraine as Putin Channels Yanukovych Request" . Bloomberg News . Retrieved 5 March 2014 . ^ Radyuhin, Vladimir (1 March 2014). "Russian Parliament approves use of army in Ukraine" .

The Hindu . Chennai, India. ^ "Vladimir Putin signs treaty for Russia to take Crimea from Ukraine – video" .

The Guardian . 18 March 2014 . Retrieved 28 December 2014 . ^ a b "Russia President Vladimir Putin signs treaty to annex Crimea after residents vote to leave Ukraine" . CBS News. 18 March 2014. ^ "Has Vladimir Putin blinked over Ukraine?" .

The Daily Telegraph . 7 July 2014. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022 . Retrieved 22 March 2018 . ^ Совещание послов и постоянных представителей России . President of Russia (in Russian). 1 July 2014 . Retrieved 12 December 2021 . И хочу, чтобы все понимали: наша страна будет и впредь энергично отстаивать права русских, наших соотечественников за рубежом, использовать для этого весь арсенал имеющихся средств: от политических и экономических – до предусмотренных в международном праве гуманитарных операций, права на самооборону. ^ Putin says Russians and Ukrainians 'practically one people' , Reuters (29 August 2014). ^ Putin: Ukrainian Literature Library must not be lost in any circumstances , Interfax-Ukraine (26 December 2015). ^ Putin, Vladimir (15 August 2021). "The Historical Unity of Russians and Ukrainians" . moderndiplomacy.eu . Retrieved 17 March 2022 . I am confident that true sovereignty of Ukraine is possible only in partnership with Russia. Our spiritual, human and civilizational ties ... have been hardened by common trials, achievements, and victories. Our kinship ... is in the hearts and the memory of people living in modern Russia and Ukraine, in the blood ties that unite millions of our families. Together, we have always been and will be many times stronger and more successful. For we are one people. ^ Roth, Andrew (7 December 2021). "Putin's Ukraine rhetoric driven by distorted view of neighbour" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 12 December 2021 . ^ Georgiy Kasianov; Mikhail Krom; Alexei Miller (14 July 2021). " 'This isn't an argument about the past' We asked professional historians to weigh in on Putin's 'historical article' " . Meduza . Retrieved 12 December 2021 . ^ Шойгу обязал военных изучить статью Путина об Украине . RBK (in Russian). 15 July 2021 . Retrieved 12 December 2021 . ^ "Putin didn't budge in Ukraine peace talks. Now, Donald Trump may be forced to act" . CNN . 2 June 2025. ^ "Russia demands unacceptable conditions for peace from Ukraine" . El País . 4 June 2025. ^ "Day-by-day: Georgia-Russia crisis" . BBC News . 21 August 2008 . Retrieved 10 May 2009 . ^ New Integration Project for Eurasia – A Future That Is Being Born Today , Izvestiya (3 October 2011). ^ Bryanski, Gleb (3 October 2011). "Russia's Putin says wants to build "Eurasian Union" " . Yahoo! News . Reuters . Archived from the original on 6 October 2011 . Retrieved 4 October 2011 . ^ Kilner, James (6 October 2011). "Kazakhstan welcomes Putin's Eurasian Union concept" .

The Daily Telegraph . London. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022 . Retrieved 8 October 2011 . ^ "Russia sees union with Belarus and Kazakhstan by 2015" . BBC News . 18 November 2011 . Retrieved 19 November 2011 . ^ "Ru-ru" . Eurasian Economic Union. Archived from the original on 17 April 2016 . Retrieved 9 April 2016 . ^ Bruce Pannier (5 May 2000). "Russia: Uzbekistan Renews Old Relations" . RFE/RL. ^ "Putin Meets Karimov; Russia To Write Off Uzbek Debt" . RFE/RL. 10 December 2014. ^ "Address at a Parade Dedicated to the 55th Anniversary of Victory in the Great Patriotic War" . en.kremlin.ru . 9 May 2000. ^ "Speech at the Military Parade Celebrating the 61st Anniversary of Victory in the Great Patriotic War" . en.kremlin.ru . 9 May 2006. ^ " 'You caused this': Finland's president blames Russia for Nato alliance move" .

The National . 11 May 2022. ^ a b c America's Failed (Bi-Partisan) Russia Policy by Stephen F. Cohen , HuffPost ^ Murphy, Dean (14 January 1995). "Europe: Chechnya Summons Uneasy Memories in Former East Bloc : Ex-Soviet satellites look warily on the Russian offensive. Their fears create a new urgency for membership in NATO" . Los Angeles Times . Retrieved 12 April 2021 . ^ "Irony Amid the Menace | CEPA" . 26 May 2020 . Retrieved 12 April 2021 . ^ a b c d Stuermer, Michael (2008). Putin and the Rise of Russia . London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson. pp. 55, 57 & 192. ISBN 978-0-297-85510-1 . Retrieved 11 June 2012 . ^ a b c Gonzalo Vina & Sebastian Alison (20 July 2007). "Brown Defends Russian Expulsions, Decries Killings" . Bloomberg News. Archived from the original on 30 September 2007. ^ "UK spied on Russians with fake rock" . BBC News . 19 January 2012 . Retrieved 25 November 2015 . ^ Harding, Luke (21 January 2016). "Litvinenko inquiry: the key players" .

The Guardian . London . Retrieved 5 May 2022 . ^ "Full Report of the Litvinenko Inquiry" .

The New York Times . 21 January 2016. ^ Holden, Michael (21 January 2016). "Russia's Putin probably approved London murder of ex-KGB agent Litvinenko: UK inquiry" . Reuters . Retrieved 5 May 2022 . ^ Thom Shanker; Mark Landler (11 February 2007). "Putin Says U.S. Is Undermining Global Stability" .

The New York Times . ^ "Interview for Indian Television Channel Doordarshan and Press Trust of India News Agency" . Kremlin.ru. 18 January 2007. Archived from the original on 4 May 2008 . Retrieved 22 June 2013 . ^ a b "Speech and the Following Discussion at the Munich Conference on Security Policy (43rd Munich Conference on Security Policy)" . 10 February 2007. Archived from the original on 9 March 2012. ^ Watson, Rob (10 February 2007). "Putin's speech: Back to cold war?" . BBC News. ^ "Munich Conference on Security Policy, As Delivered by Secretary of Defense Robert M. Gates, 11 February 2007" . Defenselink.mil . Retrieved 21 December 2013 . ^ "Press Conference following the end of the G8 Summit" . Kremlin.ru. 8 June 2007. Archived from the original on 4 May 2008 . Retrieved 22 June 2013 . ^ "Russia walks away from CFE arms treaty" . fijilive.com . 12 December 2007. Archived from the original on 22 December 2015 . Retrieved 31 July 2015 . ^ "Putin: supports for Kosovo unilateral independence 'immoral, illegal' " . Xinhua News Agency. 14 February 2008 . Retrieved 25 February 2008 . ^ "Putin calls Kosovo independence 'terrible precedent' " .

The Sydney Morning Herald . 23 February 2008. ^ "Address by President of the Russian Federation" . en.kremlin.ru . 18 March 2014. ^ "Why the Kosovo 'precedent' does not justify Russia's annexation of Crimea" .

The Washington Post . ^ Simpson, Emma (16 January 2006). "Merkel cools Berlin Moscow ties" . BBC News . Retrieved 22 June 2013 . ^ "Silvio Berlusconi and Vladimir Putin: the odd couple" . Financial Times . 2 October 2015. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. ^ Buchanan, Rose (17 October 2014). "Putin pays late-night visit to 'old friend' Berlusconi" .

The Independent . ^ Putin: "Berlusconi una persona cara, un vero amico" . Rai News ^ "Russia's Putin calls Berlusconi a dear, wise friend and statesman" . Reuters. 12 June 2023 . Retrieved 12 June 2023 . ^ " West in "medieval crusade" on Gaddafi: Putin Archived 23 March 2011 at the Wayback Machine ." The Times ( Reuters ). 21 March 2011. ^ Shuster, Simon. " The World According to Putin Archived 27 February 2022 at the Wayback Machine ," Time 16 September 2013, pp. 30–35. ^ "Battle for Ukraine: How the west lost Putin" . Financial Times . 2 February 2015. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022 . Retrieved 25 November 2015 . ^ U.S., other powers kick Russia out of G8 , CNN ^ "Russia Temporarily Kicked Out of G8 Club of Rich Countries" . Business Insider . 18 June 2013 . Retrieved 25 March 2014 . ^ Demirjian, Karoun; Birnbaum, Michael (24 October 2014). "Russia's president excoriates the United States for world's problems" .

The Washington Post . ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved 4 March 2022 . ^ " Russian President Vladimir Putin says 'only an insane person' would fear Russian attack on NATO ". Daily News . 7 June 2015. ^ "Putin Congratulates Trump on Victory and Hopeful of Better Ties" . Bloomberg L.P. 9 November 2016 . Retrieved 18 May 2017 . ^ "Vladimir Putin likely gave go-ahead for U.S. cyberattack, intelligence officials say" . CBS News. 15 December 2016 . Retrieved 18 May 2017 . ^ Englund, Will (28 July 2016). "The roots of the hostility between Putin and Clinton" .

The Washington Post . ^ "The top four reasons Vladimir Putin might have a grudge against Hillary Clinton" . National Post . 16 December 2016. ^ Crowley, Michael; Ioffe, Julia (26 July 2016). "Why Putin hates Hillary" . Politico . Retrieved 5 August 2023 . ^ Carroll, Oliver (19 January 2018). "US-Russia relations fail to improve in Trump's first year and they are likely to get worse" .

The Independent . ^ "Vladimir Putin says US-Russia relations are worse since Donald Trump took office" .

The Independent . 12 April 2017. ^ Dodd, Vikram; Harding, Luke; MacAskill, Ewen (8 March 2018). "Sergei Skripal: former Russian spy poisoned with nerve agent, say police" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 17 March 2018 . ^ Borger, Julian (15 March 2018). "Spy poisoning: allies back UK and blast Russia at UN security council" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 17 March 2018 . ^ Grierson, Jamie; Wintour, Patrick (17 March 2018). "Sergei Skripal: Russia expels 23 UK diplomats as row deepens" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 17 March 2018 . ^ Hamilton, Fiona; Parfitt, Tom; Coates, Sam; Blakely, Rhys; Fisher, Lucy (16 March 2018). "Johnson points finger at Putin for Salisbury spy attack" .

The Times . Retrieved 17 March 2018 . ^ Putin, Vladimir (18 June 2020). "The Real Lessons of the 75th Anniversary of World War II" .

The National Interest . ^ Middelaar, Luuk van (26 June 2020). "Poetin is politicus, en dus historicus" . NRC Handelsblad . ^ "Putin pulls back from last remaining nuclear arms control pact with the US" . CNN . 21 February 2023. ^ Putin: Russia to station nuclear weapons in Belarus BBC (25 March 2023) ^ "Putin's ominous message: 'We can kill people in broad daylight in EU, we'll take care of our people' " . 2 August 2024. ^ Walker, Shaun; Cole, Deborah (2 August 2024). "Kremlin admits Vadim Krasikov is a Russian state assassin" .

The Guardian . ^ Coalson, Robert (3 August 2024). "Beyond the Elation, Putin's Prisoner Swap Has Ominous Implications" . Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty . ^ "Things to know about the largest US-Russia prisoner swap in post-Soviet history" . AP News . 1 August 2024. Archived from the original on 2 August 2024 . Retrieved 5 August 2024 .

The U.S. and Russia on Thursday completed their largest prisoner swap in post-Soviet history... ^ "Russia hits Kyiv with huge attack while condemning US strikes on Iran" . Politico . 23 June 2025. ^ Black, Ian (29 May 2002). "Russia and NATO greet arrival of a warm front" .

The Guardian . ^ Russia Forges Nuclear Links With Venezuela Archived 10 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine France 24 ^ "World – Americas – Russian bombers land in Venezuela" . BBC. 11 September 2008 . Retrieved 25 November 2015 . ^ Tyler, Patrick (16 December 2000). "Putin, in Cuba, Signals Priority of Ties to U.S." The New York Times . Retrieved 23 August 2016 . ^ McCoy, Terrence; Harlan, Chico (24 February 2022). "The global right has lionized Putin.

The Ukraine attack leaves many leaders on an awkward footing" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 18 March 2022 . ^ Putin: Iran Has Right to Develop Peaceful Nuclear Programme Archived 6 April 2008 at the Wayback Machine , 16 October 2007, Rbc.ru ^ "Putin's warning to the U.S." Reuters . 16 October 2007. Archived from the original on 17 October 2007. ^ Владимир Путин положительно оценил итоги Второго Каспийского саммита на встрече с Президентом Ирана Махмудом Ахмадинежадом (in Russian). Kremlin.ru. 16 October 2007. Archived from the original on 4 May 2008. ^ Визит в Исламскую Республику Иран. Второй Каспийский саммит (in Russian). Kremlin.ru. 16 October 2007. Archived from the original on 4 May 2008. ^ "Putin confirms Iran visit, brushes off 'plot' reports" . Lebanon Wire. 15 October 2007. Archived from the original on 16 October 2015. ^ Vladimir Putin defies assassination threats to make historic visit to Tehran , 16 October 2007, The Times . ^ "Answer to a Question at the Joint Press Conference Following the Second Caspian Summit" . Kremlin.ru. 16 October 2007. Archived from the original on 4 May 2008. ^ "Putin's visit 'historic and strategic' " . Gulf News . 18 April 2008. Archived from the original on 14 May 2013 . Retrieved 22 June 2013 . ^ Parks, Cara (21 March 2011). "Putin: Military Intervention In Libya Resembles 'Crusades' " . HuffPost . ^ Crugnale, James (15 December 2011). "Vladimir Putin Blames US Drones For Gaddafi Death, Slams John McCain" . Mediaite.com. Archived from the original on 4 January 2012 . Retrieved 22 June 2013 . ^ Citizen, Ottawa (16 December 2011). "Putin claims U.S. planned murder of Gadhafi" . Canada.com. Archived from the original on 20 October 2013 . Retrieved 22 June 2013 . ^ Trenin, Dmitri (9 February 2012). "Why Russia Supports Assad" .

The New York Times . ^ Fred Weir (19 January 2012). "Why Russia is willing to sell arms to Syria" .

The Christian Science Monitor . Retrieved 22 June 2013 . ^ Viscusi, Gregory (1 June 2012). "Hollande Clashes With Putin Over Ouster of Syria's Assad" . Bloomberg BusinessWeek . Archived from the original on 18 July 2012 . Retrieved 22 June 2013 . ^ Putin, Vladimir V. (11 September 2013). "A Plea for Caution From Russia" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 11 September 2013 . ^ "Putin says US, Russia agree on how to destroy Syria's chemical weapons" .

The Jerusalem Post . 8 October 2013. ^ Melik Kaylan. "Putin's Syria Gambit Could Be His Waterloo" . Forbes . ^ Kaylan, Melik. "Is Putin About To Invade Ukraine?" . Forbes . ^ Pedler, John (2015). A Word Before Leaving: A Former Diplomat's Weltanschauung . p. 129. ^ Borshchevskaya, Anna (2022). Putin's War in Syria . I. B. Tauris. pp. 70, 71, 80, 81, 157, 169, 171, 174. ISBN 978-0-7556-3463-7 . Even pro-Kremlin Russian analysts over the years, in private, acknowledged that at least one chief Russian goal in Syria has been anti-American. Anti-Americanism was also behind the Kremlin's chief motivation for supporting Assad ^ "Russia carries out first air strikes in Syria" . Al Jazeera. 30 September 2015. Archived from the original on 30 September 2015 . Retrieved 1 October 2015 . ^ Geukjian, Ohannes (2022). "5: Russian Diplomacy, War, and Peace Making, 2017–19".

The Russian Military Intervention in Syria . McGill-Queen's University Press. p. 196. ISBN 978-0-228-00829-3 . Russia's overreach aimed at undermining and hollowing out the US-led international order ^ Cohen, Roger (24 December 2022). "Putin Wants Fealty, and He's Found It in Africa" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 3 January 2023. ^ Bax, Pauline (3 December 2021). "Russia's Influence in the Central African Republic" . Archived from the original on 2 March 2022. ^ Posthumus, Bram (20 May 2022). "Analysis: The curious case of Russia in Central African Republic" . Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 1 June 2022. ^ Burke, Sauer; Jason, Pjotr (16 December 2022). "Ally of Wagner Group boss hurt in 'assassination attempt' in central Africa" .

The Guardian . Archived from the original on 17 December 2022. ^ Gershkovich, Evan (26 October 2019). "At Russia's Inaugural Africa Summit, Moscow Sells Sovereignty" .

The Moscow Times . ^ "Putin: relations with Africa are a 'priority' for Moscow" . Africa News . 20 March 2023. ^ "Vladimir Putin signs deals worth $1.3bn during UAE visit" . Young Herald . Archived from the original on 26 February 2021 . Retrieved 17 October 2019 . ^ "Putin highlights unique bond formed between Russia, Israel" . TASS . Retrieved 4 March 2022 . ^ Wong, Edward; Swanson, Ana (2 January 2023). "How Russia's War on Ukraine Is Worsening Global Starvation" .

The New York Times . ^ Madslien, Jorn (4 July 2007). "Russia's economic might: spooky or soothing?" . BBC News . Retrieved 2 March 2010 . ^ Arkhipov, Ilya (24 January 2013). "Putin Approval Rating Falls to Lowest Since 2000: Poll" . Bloomberg L.P . Retrieved 22 June 2013 . ^ "Putin's Approval Rating Soars to 87%, Poll Says" . Moscow Times . 6 August 2014 . Retrieved 6 July 2021 . ^ "Vladimir Putin's approval rating at record levels" .

The Guardian . 23 July 2015. ^ Июльские рейтинги одобрения и доверия (in Russian). Levada Centre. 23 July 2015. Archived from the original on 29 January 2017 . Retrieved 29 March 2016 . ^ "Putin's approval ratings hit 89 percent, the highest they've ever been" .

The Washington Post . 24 June 2015. ^ "Quarter of Russians Think Living Standards Improved During Putin's Rule" (in Russian). Oprosy.info. Archived from the original on 31 July 2013 . Retrieved 22 June 2013 . ^ Stone, Norman (25 May 2010). "No wonder they like Putin" .

The Times . Archived from the original on 25 May 2010 . Retrieved 15 May 2025 . ^ "Opinion: The truth about Putin's 86-percent approval rating. How people fail to understand survey data about support for the Kremlin" . Meduza . Retrieved 10 December 2015 . It's wrong to compare directly the ratings of Russian and foreign politicians.

In democratic countries, politics is based on competition and the constant contestation between different candidates and platforms.

The Russian political system, on the other hand, is based on the absence of a credible alternative. Accordingly, public approval doesn't indicate the country's assessment of concrete political decisions, but a general acceptance of the course chosen by those in power. ^ Bennetts, Marc (17 April 2017). "Alexei Navalny: Is Russia's Anti-Corruption Crusader Vladimir Putin's Kryptonite?" . Newsweek . Retrieved 7 June 2017 . ^ "New Reports Highlight Russia's Deep-Seated Culture of Corruption" . Voice of America . 26 January 2020 . Retrieved 16 March 2020 . ^ "Countering Russian kleptocrats: What the West's Response to Assault on Ukraine Should Look Like" . Transparency International . 4 March 2022. Corruption is endemic in Russia. With a score of just 29 out of 100, Russia is the lowest-ranking country in Europe on Transparency International's 2021 Corruption Perceptions Index. ^ " "Левада-Центр": две трети россиян считают, что в проблемах страны виноват Путин" . Znak.com . Archived from the original on 18 January 2022 . Retrieved 22 November 2018 . ^ "Refworld | 'Good Tsar, Bad Boyars': Popular Attitudes and Azerbaijan's Future" . Refworld . United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees . Retrieved 22 November 2018 . ^ "Рейтинг доверия Путину достиг исторического минимума. Он упал вдвое с 2015 года" . TV Rain . 18 January 2019 . Retrieved 19 January 2019 . ^ "Доверие политикам (1)" . wciom.ru . Retrieved 25 May 2020 . ^ "Доверие политикам (2)" . wciom.ru . Retrieved 25 May 2020 . ^ Kolesnikov, Andrei (15 June 2020). "Why Putin's Rating Is at a Record Low" . Moscow Times . Retrieved 16 June 2020 . ^ Sauer, Pjotr (25 February 2022). " 'Pure Orwell': how Russian state media spins invasion as liberation" .

The Guardian . ^ a b Gessen, Masha (4 March 2022). "The War That Russians Do Not See" .

The New Yorker . ^ Hopkins, Valerie (6 March 2022). "Ukrainians Find That Relatives in Russia Don't Believe It's a War" .

The New York Times . ^ "Use Only Official Sources About Ukraine War, Russian Media Watchdog Tells Journalists" . Moscow Times . 24 February 2022. Archived from the original on 24 February 2022 . Retrieved 24 February 2022 . ^ a b "Faced with foreign pressure, Russians rally around Putin, poll shows" .

The New York Times . 31 March 2022. ^ "Ukrainians want to stay and fight, but don't see Russian people as the enemy. A remarkable poll from Kyiv" . European Leadership Network . 14 March 2022. ^ a b "In Russia, opinion polls are a political weapon" . openDemocracy . 9 March 2022. ^ a b "Независимые социологи: 71% россиян испытывает гордость из-за войны с Украиной" . Радио Свобода . Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty . 17 March 2022. ^ "Independent sociologists: The vast majority of Russians feel proud of the war with Ukraine" . Belsat TV . 18 March 2022. ^ Dougherty, Jill (3 April 2022). "Russians in the dark about true state of war amid country's Orwellian media coverage" . CNN . ^ "Одобрение Институтов, Рейтинги Партий И Политиков" . levada.ru . 30 March 2022. ^ "Putin's Approval Surges After Launch of 'Military Operation' in Ukraine" . Moscow Times . 31 March 2022. ^ "Поддерживают ли россияне войну в Украине? Смотря как спросить" . BBC News Russian . 8 March 2022. ^ Yaffa, Joshua. "Why Do So Many Russians Say They Support the War in Ukraine?" .

The New Yorker . ^ "Putin Quietly Signals He Is Open to a Cease-Fire in Ukraine" .

The New York Times . 23 December 2023. ^ "Одобрение органов власти" (in Russian) . Retrieved 25 May 2020 . ^ " Акции протеста 12 июня " (in Russian). Levada Centre . 13 June 2017. Retrieved 17 June 2020. ^ Plokhy, Serhii (16 May 2023).

The Russo-Ukrainian War . Penguin Books . ISBN 978-1-80206-179-6 . Archived from the original on 30 October 2023 . Retrieved 2 March 2024 . ^ Zavadskaya, Margarita (2023). "Russia: Nations in Transit 2023 Country Report" . Freedom House . Archived from the original on 13 March 2024 . Retrieved 25 March 2024 .

In Russia, national governance represents outright authoritarianism, dominated by widespread oppression and large-scale corruption among the top elites.

The 2022 invasion of Ukraine has set the Russian regime on a further downward spiral, making it one of the most notorious personalist dictatorships in the world. ^ Kovalev, Alexey (26 March 2024). "Russia Is Returning to Its Totalitarian Past" . Foreign Policy . Archived from the original on 10 March 2024 . Retrieved 25 March 2024 . ^ Bass, Sadie (5 August 2009). "Putin Bolsters Tough Guy Image With Shirtless Photos, Australian Broadcasting Corporation" . ABC News . Retrieved 22 June 2013 . ^ a b Rawnsley, Adam (26 May 2011). "Pow! Zam! Nyet! 'Superputin' Battles Terrorists, Protesters in Online Comic" . Wired . Retrieved 27 May 2011 . ^ "Putin gone wild: Russia abuzz over pics of shirtless leader" . Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. Associated Press. 22 August 2007 . Retrieved 2 March 2010 . ^ Mikhailova, Tatiana (2013). "Putin as the Father of the Nation".

In Goscilo, Helena (ed.). Putin as Celebrity and Cultural Icon . Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-52851-1 . ^ Walsh, Nick Paton (7 July 2006). "Putin woos western critics with webcast" .

The Guardian . ^ "Putin recalls kissing boy's belly" . BBC. 6 July 2006. ^ Kravchenko, Stepan; Biryukov, Andrey (13 March 2020). "Putin Doesn't Like Cult of Personality of Putin, Kremlin Says" . Bloomberg L.P. Retrieved 3 August 2021 . ^ Vladimir Putin diving discovery was staged, spokesman admits , The Daily Telegraph . Retrieved 16 March 2012. ^ "Russians smell something fishy in Putin's latest stunt" . Reuters . 29 July 2013 . Retrieved 12 August 2013 . ^ Kavic, Boris; Novak, Marja; Gaunt, Jeremy (8 March 2016). "Slovenian comedian rocks with Putin parody; Trump to follow" . Reuters . Retrieved 21 May 2017 . ^ "A senile Putin becomes a parody of his own parody" .

The Spectator . 19 March 2016 . Retrieved 18 May 2017 . ^ Shearlaw, Maeve (9 September 2015). "Let Putin be your fitness inspiration hero" .

The Guardian . ^ Van Vugt, Mark (7 May 2014). "Does Putin Suffer From the Napoleon Complex?" . Psychology Today . Retrieved 7 December 2018 . ^ "Statesmen and stature: how tall are our world leaders?" .

The Guardian . 18 October 2011 . Retrieved 27 December 2018 . ^ "Песни про Путина" . Openspace.ru . 14 March 2008. Archived from the original on 18 September 2009 . Retrieved 7 May 2012 . ^ Как используется бренд "Путин": зажигалки, икра, футболки, консервированный перец Archived 2 April 2015 at the Wayback Machine Gazeta 30 November 2007. ^ "Person of the Year 2007" . Time . 2007. Archived from the original on 7 September 2008 . Retrieved 8 July 2009 . ^ "Putin Answers Questions From Time Magazine" . 20 December 2007. Archived from the original on 11 December 2021 . Retrieved 21 June 2016 – via YouTube. ^ Albright, Madeleine (23 April 2014). "Vladimir Putin – The Russian Leader Who Truly Tests The West" . Time . Retrieved 2 November 2016 . ^ Sharkov, Damien (20 April 2016). "Putin Is a 'Smart But Truly Evil Man,' says Madeleine Albright" . Newsweek . Retrieved 2 November 2016 . ^ "The World's Most Powerful People 2016" . Forbes . 14 December 2016. For the fourth consecutive year, Forbes ranked Russian President Vladimir Putin as the world's most powerful person.

From the motherland to Syria to the U.S. presidential elections, Russia's leader continues to get what he wants. ^ Ewalt, David M. (8 May 2018). "The World's Most Powerful People 2018" . Forbes . Retrieved 10 May 2018 . ^ Umland, Andreas (21 January 2016). "The Putinverstehers' Misconceived Charge of Russophobia" . Archived from the original on 15 June 2017. ^ Gregory, Paul Roderick (5 April 2014). "Empathizing With The Devil: How Germany's Putin–Verstehers Shield Russia" . Forbes . ^ a b Sukhotsky, Cyril (5 March 2004), Путинизмы – 'продуманный личный эпатаж?' , BBC Russian (in Russian) ^ Kharatyan, Kirill (25 December 2012), Кирилл Харатьян: Жаргон Владимира Путина , Vedomosti (in Russian) ^ Luhn, Alec (6 May 2015). "15 Years of Vladimir Putin: 15 Ways He Has Changed Russia and the World" .

The Guardian . ^ Jäkel, Lara (15 March 2022). "Wladimir Putin: 'Eiskalter Bürokrat' – Otto von Habsburg warnte schon 2003 vor ihm" . Die Welt . ^ "Über Putin: Wie Otto von Habsburg ihn einschätzte (2003 und 2005)" . YouTube . 8 March 2022. ^ Gupta, Oliver Das (5 November 2005). "Putin ist ein eiskalter Technokrat" . Süddeutsche.de . ^ Kasparov, Garry (28 October 2015). "Garry Kasparov: How the United States and Its Western Allies Propped Up Putin" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved 9 April 2016 . ^ "Alexei Navalny: 'Putin is the Tsar of corruption' " . BBC . 23 January 2016. ^ Strauss, Daniel (17 January 2016). "Hillary Clinton Describes Relationship With Putin: 'It's... interesting' " . Politico . Retrieved 14 April 2016 . ^ "Hillary Clinton: Putin is Arrogant and Tough" . GPS with Fareed Zakaria. 27 July 2014. Archived from the original on 25 June 2016 . Retrieved 15 July 2016 – via YouTube. ^ Zakaria, Fareed. "President Vladimir Putin on Sec. Hillary Clinton" . CNN . Retrieved 15 July 2016 . ^ Henderson, Barney (7 September 2014). "Dalai Lama attacks 'self-centered' Vladimir Putin" .

The Daily Telegraph . Archived from the original on 10 January 2022 . Retrieved 9 April 2016 . ^ "Decoding Vladimir Putin's Plan" . U.S. News & World Report . 5 January 2015. ^ Kissinger, Henry (5 March 2014). "How The Ukraine Crisis Ends" .

The Washington Post . ^ Rosenberg, Steve (9 October 2019). "Berlin Wall anniversary: The 'worst night of my life' " . BBC News . Retrieved 21 July 2020 . ^ a b "Mikhail Gorbachev claims Vladimir Putin saved Russia from falling apart" . International Business Times . 27 December 2014. ^ Struck, Doug (5 December 2007). "Gorbachev Applauds Putin's Achievements" .

The Washington Post . ^ Taylor, Brian D. (2011). State Building in Putin's Russia: Policing and Coercion after Communism . Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press . p. 278. ISBN 978-0-521-76088-1 . ^ Bader, Max; van Ham, Carolien (2015). "What explains regional variation in election fraud? Evidence from Russia: a research note" (PDF) . Post-Soviet Affairs . 31 (6): 514– 528. doi : 10.1080/1060586X.2014.969023 . ISSN 1060-586X . S2CID 154548875 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 July 2023 . Retrieved 14 July 2023 . ^ "Russia | Country report | Freedom in the World | 2005" . Dreedom House. Archived from the original on 31 December 2016 . Retrieved 30 December 2016 . ^ a b Diamond, Larry (7 January 2015). "Facing Up to the Democratic Recession" . Journal of Democracy . 26 (1). Baltimore, Maryland: Johns Hopkins University Press : 141– 155. doi : 10.1353/jod.2015.0009 . ISSN 1086-3214 . S2CID 38581334 . ^ Levitsky, Steven; Way, Lucan A. (2010). Competitive Authoritarianism: Hybrid Regimes after the Cold War . Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press . ISBN 978-1-139-49148-8 . ^ Gainous, Jason; Wagner, Kevin M.; Ziegler, Charles E. (2018). "Digital media and political opposition in authoritarian systems: Russia's 2011 and 2016 Duma elections". Democratization . 25 (2): 209– 226. doi : 10.1080/13510347.2017.1315566 . ISSN 1351-0347 . S2CID 152199313 . ^ Gelman, Vladimir (2015). Authoritarian Russia: Analyzing Post-Soviet Regime Changes . Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania: University of Pittsburgh Press . doi : 10.2307/j.ctt155jmv1 . ISBN 978-0-8229-6368-4 . JSTOR j.ctt155jmv1 . ^ Ross, Cameron (2018). "Regional elections in Russia: instruments of authoritarian legitimacy or instability?" . Palgrave Communications . 4 (1) 75: 1– 9. doi : 10.1057/s41599-018-0137-1 . ISSN 2055-1045 . ^ White, Stephen (2014). White, Stephen (ed.). Russia's Authoritarian Elections . doi : 10.4324/9781315872100 . ISBN 978-1-315-87210-0 . ^ Ross, Cameron (2011). "Regional Elections and Electoral Authoritarianism in Russia". Europe-Asia Studies . 63 (4): 641– 661. doi : 10.1080/09668136.2011.566428 . ISSN 0966-8136 . S2CID 154016379 . ^ Skovoroda, Rodion; Lankina, Tomila (2017). "Fabricating votes for Putin: new tests of fraud and electoral manipulations from Russia" . Post-Soviet Affairs . 33 (2): 100– 123. doi : 10.1080/1060586X.2016.1207988 . ISSN 1060-586X . S2CID 54830119 . ^ Moser, Robert G.; White, Allison C. (2017). "Does electoral fraud spread?

The expansion of electoral manipulation in Russia". Post-Soviet Affairs . 33 (2): 85– 99. doi : 10.1080/1060586X.2016.1153884 . ISSN 1060-586X . S2CID 54037737 . ^ "Russia Downgraded to 'Not Free' | Freedom House" . freedomhouse.org . Archived from the original on 1 January 2017 . Retrieved 30 December 2016 . ^ "Democracy Index 2015: Democracy in an age of anxiety" (PDF) . yabiladi.com . ^ "A new low for global democracy" .

The Economist . 9 February 2022. ^ Kekic, Laza. "Index of democracy by Economist Intelligence Unit" (PDF) .

The Economist . Retrieved 27 December 2007 . ^ Gregory, Paul Roderick (18 July 2018). "Putin Declares Himself Dictator With The Navalny Verdict" . Forbes . ^ "Vladimir Putin has shifted from autocracy to dictatorship" .

The Economist . 13 November 2021. ^ Kornblum, John (8 February 2015). "Time to Stop Letting Putin Win the War of Words" .

The Wall Street Journal . ^ Ghodsee, Kristen (2017). Red Hangover: Legacies of Twentieth-Century Communism . Durham, North Carolina: Duke University Press . pp. xix– xx, 134, 197– 200. ISBN 978-0-8223-6949-3 . ^ "Ukraine war: Putin should face trial this year, says top lawyer" . BBC News . 1 January 2023. ^ "Thousands of civilians in Mariupol may have died in past month – UN tells Reuters" . Reuters . 29 March 2022. ^ Parker, Ashley (17 March 2022). "Biden calls Putin a 'war criminal' " .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 18 March 2022 . ^ Vazquez, Maegan; Carvajal, Nikki (17 March 2022). "Biden calls Putin a 'murderous dictator' and 'pure thug' " . CNN . Retrieved 6 April 2022 . ^ Gambino, Lauren (2 March 2022). "State of the Union: Joe Biden pledges to make Putin pay for Ukraine invasion" .

The Guardian . ^ "Ukraine's U.N. envoy likens Putin to Hitler" . News.com.au . 1 March 2022. Archived from the original on 7 March 2022. ^ "EU targets Russian economy after 'deluded autocrat' Putin invades Ukraine" . Reuters . 25 February 2022. ^ "Latvia's PM says Putin and his regime need to be isolated from the world" . Reuters . 25 February 2022. ^ "EU to impose unprecedented sanctions on Russia as leaders meet" ; The Irish Times ]; 24 February 2022 ^ Breeden, Aurelien; Troianovski, Anton (3 March 2022). "A Putin-Macron call leaves France persuaded that Russia wants 'control of all of Ukraine" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 20 March 2023 . ^ "After Putin highlights Russia's nukes, France retorts: NATO is a nuclear alliance" .

The Times of Israel . Agence France-Presse . 25 February 2022 . Retrieved 20 April 2025 . ^ Gillies, Rob (5 March 2025). "Trudeau slams Trump for starting a trade war with Canada while appeasing Putin" . Associated Press News . Archived from the original on 7 March 2025 . Retrieved 7 March 2025 . ^ Merrick, Rob (24 February 2022). "Boris Johnson brands Putin 'dictator' and vows to end 'hideous and barbaric' Ukrainian war" .

The Independent . ^ Hirsch, Michael (12 March 2022). "Putin's Thousand-Year War" . Foreign Policy . ^ "The cocktail of ideologies behind Vladimir Putin" . Deutsche Welle . 24 March 2022. ^ Burbank, Jane (22 March 2022). "The Grand Theory Driving Putin to War" .

The New York Times . ^ Foer, Franklin (8 March 2025). "Putin Won" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved 8 March 2025 . ^ "Putin 2024: Meduza breaks down the evidence pointing to the most fraudulent elections in modern Russian history" . Meduza . 20 March 2024. ^ " 'Shpilkin method': Statistical tool gauges voter fraud in Putin landslide" . France 24 . 20 March 2024. ^ "Russian Presidential Vote an 'Imitation,' Election Watchdog Golos Says" .

The Moscow Times . 18 March 2024. ^ "Ukrainians living under Russian occupation are coerced to vote for Putin" . Associated Press . 14 March 2024. Archived from the original on 14 March 2024 . Retrieved 14 March 2024 . ^ Vasilyeva, Olga (20 March 2024). "The election that wasn't" . Novaya Gazeta Europe . ^ "After Putin's election: Further isolation of Russia?" . JAMnews . 20 March 2024. ^ "The extent of fraud in Russia's presidential election begins to emerge" . Le Monde . 20 March 2024. ^ ( Sakwa 2008 ) ^ Sonne, Paul; Miller, Greg (3 October 2021). "Secret money, swanky real estate and a Monte Carlo mystery" .

The Washington Post . Washington, D.C. Archived from the original on 3 October 2021 . Retrieved 6 October 2021 . ^ Harding, Luke (3 October 2021). "Pandora papers reveal hidden riches of Putin's inner circle" .

The Guardian . London. Archived from the original on 3 October 2021 . Retrieved 6 October 2021 . ^ "Investigation Claims to Uncover Putin's Extramarital Daughter" . Moscow Times . 25 November 2020. Archived from the original on 25 November 2020 . Retrieved 5 October 2021 . ^ "Putin's secret daughter 'part-time DJ living in Paris under pseudonym' " .

The Independent . 29 November 2024. ^ "Vladimir Putin and Google: The most popular search queries answered" . BBC News . 19 March 2018. Archived from the original on 19 March 2018 . Retrieved 3 October 2021 . ^ "A new Russian first Lady? Putin hints he may marry again" . Reuters . 20 December 2018. Archived from the original on 20 December 2018 . Retrieved 3 October 2021 . ^ Hoyle, Ben (14 March 2015). "Motherland is gripped by baby talk that Putin is father again" .

The Times . London . Retrieved 3 October 2021 . ^ "Russia President Vladimir Putin's divorce goes through" . BBC News . 2 April 2014. Archived from the original on 2 April 2014 . Retrieved 2 April 2014 . ^ Allen, Cooper (2 April 2014). "Putin divorce finalized, Kremlin says" . USA Today . Archived from the original on 3 April 2014 . Retrieved 3 October 2021 . ^ MacFarquahar, Neil (13 March 2015). "Putin Has Vanished, but Rumors Are Popping Up Everywhere" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 3 October 2021 . ^ a b "Алина Кабаева после долгого перерыва вышла в свет, вызвав слухи о новой беременности (ФОТО, ВИДЕО)" . NEWSru (in Russian). 19 May 2015. Archived from the original on 22 May 2015 . Retrieved 3 October 2021 . ^ Sharkov, Damien (2 February 2016). "What Do We Know About Putin's Family?" . Newsweek . Archived from the original on 10 February 2026 . Retrieved 3 October 2021 . ^ Dettmer, Jamie (28 May 2019). "Reports of Putin Fathering Twins Test Free Speech in Russia" . Voice of America. Archived from the original on 13 November 2019 . Retrieved 23 October 2020 . ^ "Путин сообщил о рождении второго внука" (in Russian). NTV . 15 June 2017. Archived from the original on 16 June 2017 . Retrieved 3 October 2021 . ^ "Russia's Putin opens up about grandchildren, appeals for family privacy during live TV show" . South China Morning Post . Agence France-Presse . 15 June 2017. Archived from the original on 15 June 2017 . Retrieved 3 October 2021 . ^ Soshnikov, Andrei; Reiter, Svetlana (8 April 2022). "The Secretive Life Of The Dutch Man Who Was Believed To Be Vladimir Putin's Son-In-Law: An Investigation" . Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. Archived from the original on 8 April 2022 . Retrieved 9 April 2022 . ^ "Investigation Links German Ex-Ballet Director Zelensky with Putin's Daughter" . Moscow Times . 19 May 2022. Archived from the original on 19 May 2022 . Retrieved 20 May 2022 . ^ Oltermann, Philip (19 May 2022). "Putin's daughter flew to Munich 'more than 50 times' in two years, leaks reveal" .

The Guardian . London. Archived from the original on 19 May 2022 . Retrieved 20 May 2022 . ^ Kroft, Steve (19 May 2019). "How the Danske Bank money-laundering scheme involving $230 billion unraveled" . CBS News. Archived from the original on 20 May 2019 . Retrieved 3 October 2021 . ^ "OCCRP – The Russian Banks and Putin's Cousin" . reportingproject.net . Archived from the original on 6 May 2016 . Retrieved 10 June 2019 . ^ Wile, Rob (23 January 2017). "Is Vladimir Putin Secretly the Richest Man in the World?" . Money . Retrieved 5 May 2022 . ^ "Quote.Rbc.Ru :: Аюмй Яюмйр-Оерепаспц – Юйжхх, Ярпсйрспю, Мнбнярх, Тхмюмяш" . Quote.ru. Archived from the original on 26 October 2007 . Retrieved 2 March 2010 . ^ ЦИК зарегистрировал список "ЕР" Rossiyskaya Gazeta N 4504 27 October 2007. ^ ЦИК раскрыл доходы Путина Vzglyad . 26 October 2007. ^ Radia, Kirit (8 June 2012). "Putin's Extravagant $700,000 Watch Collection" . ABC News . Retrieved 1 February 2019 . ^ Hanbury, Mary (23 June 2017). "How Vladimir Putin spends his mysterious fortune rumoured to be worth $70 billion" .

The Independent . Retrieved 1 February 2019 . ^ "Putin's Extravagant $700,000 Watch Collection" . ABC News . 8 June 2012. ^ Gennadi Timchenko: Russia's most low-profile billionaire Sobesednik No. 10, 7 March 2007. ^ Harding, Luke (21 December 2007). "Putin, the Kremlin power struggle and the $40bn fortune" .

The Guardian . London . Retrieved 18 August 2008 . ^ "Is Vladimir Putin the richest man on earth?" . News.com.au . 26 September 2013. Archived from the original on 8 December 2013 . Retrieved 26 September 2013 . ^ Joyce, Kathleen (29 June 2019). "What is Russian President Vladimir Putin's net worth?" . Fox Business . Retrieved 30 June 2019 . ^ Tayor, Adam. "Is Vladimir Putin hiding a $200 billion fortune? (And if so, does it matter?)" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 19 March 2017 . ^ William Echols (14 May 2019). "Are 'Putin's Billions' a Myth?" . Polygraph.info . Retrieved 16 May 2019 . ^ Luhn, Alec; Harding, Luke (7 April 2016). "Putin dismisses Panama Papers as an attempt to destabilise Russia" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 18 September 2022 . ^ a b c Harding, Luke (3 April 2016). "Revealed: the $2bn offshore trail that leads to Vladimir Putin" .

The Guardian . London. ^ Der Zirkel der Macht von Vladimir Putin , Süddeutsche Zeitung ^ Wladimir Putin und seine Freunde , Süddeutsche Zeitung ^ "All Putin's Men: Secret Records Reveal Money Network Tied to Russian Leader" . panamapapers.icij.org . 3 April 2016 . Retrieved 4 April 2016 . ^ "Panama Papers: Putin associates linked to 'money laundering' " . BBC News . 3 April 2016 . Retrieved 4 April 2016 . ^ Galeotti, Mark (4 April 2016). "The Panama Papers show how corruption really works in Russia" . Vox Business and Finance . Retrieved 8 April 2016 . ^ Harding, Luke (3 April 2016). "Sergei Roldugin, the cellist who holds the key to tracing Putin's hidden fortune" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 16 October 2020 . ^ Kasparov, Garry. "Starr Forum: The Trump-Putin Phenomenon" . MIT Center for International Studies . Archived from the original on 1 April 2025 . Retrieved 8 March 2021 . ^ Solovyova, Olga (5 March 2012). "Russian Leaders Not Swapping Residences" .

The Moscow Times . Retrieved 22 March 2017 . ^ "Тайна за семью заборами" . Kommersant.ru. 31 January 2011 . Retrieved 22 June 2013 . ^ Elder, Miriam (28 August 2012). "Vladimir Putin 'Galley Slave' Lifestyle: Palaces, Planes and a $75,000 Toilet" .

The Guardian . London . Retrieved 28 August 2012 . ^ How the 1980s Explains Vladimir Putin.

By Fiona Hill & Clifford G. Gaddy, The Atlantic , 14 February 2013. ^ Foreign, Our (3 March 2011). " 'Putin Palace' Sells for US$350 Million" .

The Daily Telegraph . London. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022 . Retrieved 5 May 2012 . ^ "Putin's Palace? A Mystery Black Sea Mansion Fit for a Tsar" . BBC. 4 May 2012 . Retrieved 4 May 2012 . ^ Russia: Russia president Vladimir Putin rule: achievements, problems and future strategies . Washington, DC: International Business Publications. 2014. p. 85. ISBN 978-1-4330-6774-7 . OCLC 956347599 . ^ "Navalny Targets 'Billion-Dollar Putin Palace' in New Investigation" . Moscow Times . 19 January 2021. Archived from the original on 19 January 2021 . Retrieved 19 January 2021 . ^ "ФБК опубликовал огромное расследование о 'дворце Путина' в Геленджике. Вот главное из двухчасового фильма о строительстве ценой в 100 миллиардов" . Meduza.io . 19 January 2021. Archived from the original on 19 January 2021 . Retrieved 19 January 2021 . ^ "ФБК опубликовал расследование о 'дворце Путина' размером с 39 княжеств Монако" . tvrain.ru . 19 January 2021. Archived from the original on 19 January 2021 . Retrieved 19 January 2021 . ^ "That extra-heavy load Instead of flying, Vladimir Putin prefers to travel around Russia by armored train (allegedly for fear of Ukrainian attack)" . Meduza . 13 February 2023 . Retrieved 17 February 2023 . ^ "Сколько собак у Путина?" . aif.ru (in Russian). 23 October 2017. Archived from the original on 23 October 2017 . Retrieved 9 October 2021 . ^ a b Timothy J. Colton ; Michael MacFaul (2003). Popular Choice and Managed Democracy: the Russian elections of 1999 and 2000 . Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution. p. . ISBN 978-0-8157-1535-1 . ^ Putin Q&A: Full Transcript Time . Retrieved 22 March 2008. ^ "Putin and the monk" . FT Magazine . 25 January 2013. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. ^ "The enduring grip of the men – and mindset – of the KGB" .

The Economist . 25 April 2020. ^ "Putin to talk pipeline, attend football game" . B92 . 22 March 2011. Archived from the original on 26 March 2011 . Retrieved 22 March 2011 . ^ "Bandy, how little known sport is winning converts" .

The Local . 29 February 2016 . Retrieved 9 October 2017 . ^ "Vladimir Putin Scores Seven Goals in Epic Hockey Game" . Rolling Stone . 9 October 2015 . Retrieved 7 February 2022 . ^ "Kremlin Biography of President Vladimir Putin" . putin.kremlin.ru . Retrieved 23 May 2017 . ^ "NPR News: Vladimir Putin: Transcript of Robert Siegel Interview" . legacy.npr.org . 15 November 2001 . Retrieved 19 October 2020 . ^ "Putin awarded eighth dan by international body" . Reuters . 10 October 2012 . Retrieved 19 October 2020 . ^ "Putin becomes eighth-degree karate black belt" . CNN . 21 November 2014. ^ Putin, Vladimir; Vasily Shestakov; Alexey Levitsky (2004). Judo: History, Theory, Practice . Blue Snake Books . ISBN 978-1-55643-445-7 . ^ Hawkins, Derek (18 July 2017). "Is Vladimir Putin a judo fraud?" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 18 July 2017 . ^ Wittes, Benjamin (21 October 2015). "I'll Fight Putin Any Time, Any Place He Can't Have Me Arrested" . Lawfare . Retrieved 18 July 2017 . ^ "International Judo Federation strips titles from Vladimir Putin and Russian oligarch" . CBS News. 7 March 2022 . Retrieved 16 March 2023 . ^ Corera, Gordon; Wright, George (21 July 2022). "Ukraine war: CIA chief says no intelligence that Putin is in bad health" . BBC News . Retrieved 22 July 2022 . ^ "Putin has a special 'sensory room' at his presidential residence to relax and stave off depression" . Meduza . 6 September 2018 . Retrieved 1 May 2022 . ^ "White House, senators and generals question Putin's mental health after two years of pandemic isolation" .

The Independent . 28 February 2022. ^ "Putin's obsession with Ukraine has made analysts question his rationality" . CNBC. 28 February 2022. ^ "Putin's War Looks Increasingly Insane" . New York . 4 March 2022. ^ a b "Kremlin slams reports of Putin resignation as 'complete nonsense' " . Deutsche Welle . 6 November 2020 . Retrieved 1 May 2022 . ^ Sabin, Lamiat (22 April 2022). "Video of Vladimir Putin gripping table in meeting sparks concerns about his health" .