The terms rape , sexual assault and sexual violence are frequently used interchangeably.

The Explanatory Note of the Rome Statute , which binds the International Criminal Court , defines rape as follows: The perpetrator invaded the body of a person by conduct resulting in penetration, however slight, of any part of the body of the victim or of the perpetrator with a sexual organ, or of the anal or genital opening of the victim with any object or any other part of the body. and The invasion was committed by force, or by threat of force or coercion, such as that caused by fear of violence, duress, detention, psychological oppression or abuse of power , against such person or another person, or by taking advantage of a coercive environment, or the invasion was committed against a person incapable of giving genuine consent.

The concept of "invasion" is intended to be broad enough to be gender-neutral and the definition is understood to include situations where the victim may be incapable of giving genuine consent if affected by natural, induced or age-related incapacity. A prominent data-set on conflict-related sexual violence, Sexual Violence in Armed Conflict (SVAC), builds on the ICC definition and covers seven forms of violence: "(a) rape, (b) sexual slavery, (c) forced prostitution, (d) forced pregnancy, (e) forced sterilization/abortion, (f) sexual mutilation, and (g) sexual torture".

The data-set defines conflict-related sexual violence as the sexual violence committed by "armed actors (specifically, state militaries, rebel groups, and progovernment militias) during periods of conflict or immediately postconflict", thus excluding sexual violence by civilians. More expansive definitions may define wartime sexual violence as being committed even by civilians if the conflict creates a sense of impunity.

In 1999, humanitarian law concerned the maltreatment of civilians and "any devastation not justified by military necessity". Pre-modern Europe In the Middle Ages, the Catholic Church sought to prevent rape during feudal warfare through the institution of Peace and Truce of God (first proclaimed in 989) which discouraged soldiers from attacking women and civilians in general and through the propagation of a Christianized version of the chivalric ideal of a knight who protected innocents and did not engage in lawlessness.

In 1159, John of Salisbury wrote Policraticus in an attempt to regulate the conduct of armies engaged in "justifiable" wars. Salisbury believed that acts of theft and "rapine" (property crimes) should receive the most severe punishment, but also believed that obeying a superior's commands whether legal or illegal, moral or immoral, was the ultimate duty of the soldier. Rape and pillage were prohibited by some army codes as early as the 14th century because of the tendency to create strong hostility in civilian populations and the detrimental effects to army discipline. Despite early efforts to systematize the laws of war, rape continued to be a problem in the 15th and 16th centuries.

The influential writer Francisco de Vitoria stood for a gradual emergence of the notion that glory or conquest were not necessarily acceptable reasons to start a war.

The jurist Alberico Gentili insisted that all women, including female combatants, should be spared from sexual assault in wartime. It is suggested that one reason for the prevalence of war rape was that at the time, military circles supported the notion that all persons, including women and children, were still the enemy, with the belligerent having conquering rights over them.

In the late Middle Ages, the laws of war even considered war rape as an indication of a man's success in the battlefield and "opportunities to rape and loot were among the few advantages open to ... soldiers, who were paid with great irregularity by their leaders ... triumph over women by rape became a way to measure victory, part of a soldier's proof of masculinity and success, a tangible reward for services rendered ... an actual reward of war".

During this period in history, war rape took place not necessarily as a conscious effort of war to terrorize the enemy, but rather as earned compensation for winning a war. There is little evidence to suggest that superiors regularly ordered subordinates to commit acts of rape. Throughout this period of history, war became more regulated, specific, and regimented.

The first formal prosecution for war crimes did not take place until the late Middle Ages. Early modern Europe De jure belli ac pacis , title page from the first edition of 1625. Hugo Grotius , considered the father of the law of nations and the first to conduct a comprehensive work on systematizing the international laws of war, De jure belli ac pacis (1625), concluded that rape (phrased as "the violation of women") "should not go unpunished in war any more than in peace", rejecting the view that it is permissible to inflict damage or harm "on anything belonging to the enemy": The violation of women is variously regarded as permitted or not. Those who allow it consider only the injury done to the person, which they hold it agreeable to the law of arms to inflict on anything belonging to the enemy.

The other opinion is better: it takes into account not only the injury but also the act of unbridled lust and concludes that something pertaining to neither safety nor punishment should be no more lawful in war than in peace. This latter view is not the law of all nations, but it is the law of the more respectable ones. Emmerich van Vattel emerged as an influential figure when he pleaded for the immunity of civilians against the ravages of war, considering men and women civilians as non-combatants.

In the late 18th century and 19th century, treaties and war codes started to include vague provisions for the protection of women: The Treaty of Amity and Commerce (1785) specified that in case of war "women and children ... shall not be molested in their persons". Article 20 of the Order No. 20 (1847), a supplement to the US Rules and Articles of war, listed the following as severely punishable "Assassination, murder, malicious stabbing or maiming, rape".

The Declaration of Brussels (1874) stated that the "honours and rights of the family ... should be respected" (article 38).

In the 19th century, the treatment of soldiers, prisoners, the wounded, and civilians improved when core elements of the laws of war were put in place by nations who were signatories to treaties. However, while the customs of war mandated more humane treatment of soldiers and civilians, new weapons and advanced technology increased destruction and altered the methods of war.

The Lieber Code (1863) was the first codification of the international customary laws of land war and an important step towards humanitarian law.

The Lieber Code emphasized protection of civilians and stated that "all rape ... prohibited under the penalty of death", which was the first prohibition of rape in customary humanitarian law. 20th century During the 20th century, international legal procedures attempted to prevent and prosecute perpetrators of war rape. Similarly, individual states developed laws pertaining to war rape's victims and perpetrators.

The prohibition of rape was excluded from the Geneva Conventions and was deliberately left vague by the Hague Conventions . Article 46 of the Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907 regarding Land Warfare required only that "amily honour and rights the lives of persons ... must be respected" by the occupying powers.

After World War I , the Commission of Responsibilities , set up in 1919 to examine the atrocities committed by the German Empire and the other Central Powers during the war, found substantial evidence of sexual violence and subsequently included rape and forced prostitution among the violations of the laws and customs of war. Efforts to prosecute failed. World War II The Nuremberg and Tokyo Tribunals became the first international courts of real significance.

The victorious Allied powers established them in 1945 and 1946 respectively to prosecute the major war criminals of the European Axis powers (in fact only Germans) and of Japan for crimes against peace , war crimes , and crimes against humanity .

The possibility of prosecuting sexual violence as a war crime was present because of the recognition of war rape as serious violation of the laws of war in the Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907 assertion that "amily honour and rights the lives of persons ... must be respected." While the Nuremberg Tribunals failed to charge Nazi war criminals with rape, witnesses testified about it occurring. Several of the testimonies of victims of sexual violence during the Holocaust were by Jewish men and women. Previous war crimes trials had prosecuted for sex crimes, hence war rape could have been prosecuted under customary law and/or under the IMT (International Military Tribunals) Charter's Article 6(b): "abduction of the civilian population ... into slavery and for other purposes" and "abduction unjustified by military necessity ". Similarly, it would have been possible to prosecute war rape as crime against humanity under Article 6(c) of the Nuremberg Charter : "other inhumane acts" and "enslavement". However, notwithstanding evidence of sexual violence in Europe during World War II, a lack of will led to rape and sexual violence not being prosecuted at the Nuremberg Tribunals. According to at least 34 records, 140 European women were forced to prostitution during the German occupation of their countries, along with concentration camp female prisoners.

In many cases, girls and women were abducted from the streets of occupied cities during German patrols.

The International Military Tribunal for the Far East did convict Japanese officers "of failing to prevent rape" in the Nanjing Massacre .

The tribunal, in Tokyo, prosecuted cases of sexual violence and war rape as war crimes under the wording "inhumane treatment", "ill-treatment", and "failure to respect family honour and rights". According to the prosecution, in excess of 20,000 women and girls were raped during the first weeks of the Japanese occupation of the Chinese city of Nanjing .

The War Crimes Tribunal in Tokyo included accounts of sexual violence crimes in the trial testimonies as well as public records.

On a national level, a commander of the 14th Area Army , General Yamashita , was convicted for, inter alia, "rape under his command". Some 35 Dutch comfort women brought a successful case before the Batavia Military Tribunal in 1948. It is well known that brutal mass rapes were committed against German women; both during and after World War II. According to some estimates, over 100,000 women were raped by Soviet soldiers in Berlin both during and after the Battle of Berlin .

The phrase "from eight to 80" was used to describe potential victims of Soviet mass-rape. "Red Army soldiers don't believe in 'individual liaisons' with German women", wrote the playwright Zakhar Agranenko in his diary when he was serving as an officer of the marine infantry in East Prussia . "Nine, ten, twelve men at a time – they rape them on a collective basis." Rape was regarded by men in the Soviet army as a well-deserved form of punishment, whether the civilians had anything to do with the war or not.

In total, historians estimate that over two million German women were raped. Rapes were also committed against allied nationals during the war; for example, Marocchinate (Italian for "Moroccan' deeds") is a term which is applied to the mass rape and killings of Italian civilians by the Moroccan Goumiers , colonial troops of the French Expeditionary Corps (FEC), commanded by General Alphonse Juin , after the Battle of Monte Cassino in Italy during World War II . It was estimated that 2,000 women and 600 men were raped and most of these crimes took place in the rural area between Naples and Rome .

Following World War II, the judges at the Nuremberg trials in 1946 stated that the laws of war only applied when committed between two opposing sides, not between allies, meaning such acts were not war crimes. 1949 Geneva Conventions Main article: Geneva Conventions Common Article 3 of the 1949 Geneva Conventions provides that "violence to life and person, in particular murder of all kinds, mutilation, cruel treatment and torture" and "outrages upon personal dignity, in particular humiliating and degrading treatment" are prohibited under any circumstance whatsoever with respect to persons who are hors de combat or who are not taking part of direct hostilities in non-international conflicts. Article 27 of the 1949 Fourth Geneva Convention explicitly prohibits wartime rape and enforced prostitution of protected persons in international conflicts.

The prohibitions outlined in the 1949 Geneva Conventions were reinforced by the 1977 Additional Protocols I and II to the 1949 Geneva Conventions. Article 4 of the Fourth Geneva Convention excludes civilians under their own national authority, nationals of a state not party to the convention, neutral persons living in the belligerent nation, and allied nationals from protection under the convention. Non-protected rape victims are instead protected by international human rights law to which their home or the offending foreign state may be a party to. International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda In 1998, the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda established by the United Nations made landmark decisions defining genocidal rape (rape intended to affect a population or culture as a whole) as a form of genocide under international law.

In the trial of Jean-Paul Akayesu , the mayor of Taba Commune in Rwanda , the Trial Chamber held that "sexual assault formed an integral part of the process of destroying the Tutsi ethnic group and that the rape was systematic and had been perpetrated against Tutsi women only, manifesting the specific intent required for those acts to constitute genocide." Judge Navanethem Pillay , who went on to become the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights between 2008 and 2014, said in a statement after the verdict: "From time immemorial, rape has been regarded as spoils of war. Now it will be considered a war crime . We want to send out a strong message that rape is no longer a trophy of war." An estimated 500,000 women were raped during the 1994 Rwandan genocide . Professor Paul Walters in his April 2005 statement of support of Pillay's honorary doctorate of law at Rhodes University wrote: Under her presidency of the Rwanda Tribunal , that body rendered a judgment against the mayor of Taba Commune which found him guilty of genocide for the use of rape in "the destruction of the spirit, of the will to live, and of life itself." The Akayesu judgement includes the first interpretation and application by an international court of the 1948 Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide .

The Trial Chamber held that rape (which it defined as "a physical invasion of a sexual nature committed on a person under circumstances which are coercive") and sexual assault constitute acts of genocide insofar as they were committed with the intent to destroy, in whole or in part, a targeted group, as such. It found that sexual assault formed an integral part of the process of destroying the Tutsi ethnic group and that the rape was systematic and had been perpetrated against Tutsi women only, manifesting the specific intent required for those acts to constitute genocide.

In September 1999, the United Nations published a "Report of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighboring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994".

The report states that on 2 September 1998, Trial Chamber I of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, composed of Judges Laïty Kama, Presiding, Lennart Aspegren and Navanethem Pillay, found Jean Paul Akayesu guilty of 9 of the 15 counts proffered against him, including genocide, direct and public incitement to commit genocide and crimes against humanity, murder, torture, rape, and other inhumane acts.

The Tribunal found Jean Paul Akayesu not guilty of the six remaining counts, including the count of complicity in genocide and the counts relating to violations of Common Article 3 to the Geneva Conventions and of Additional Protocol II thereto.

On 2 October 1998, Jean Paul Akayesu was sentenced to life imprisonment for each of the nine counts, the sentences to run concurrently. Both Jean Paul Akayesu and the Prosecutor have appealed against the judgement rendered by the Trial Chamber. International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia Rape first became recognized as a crime against humanity when the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia issued arrest warrants in 1993, based on the Geneva Conventions and Violations of the Laws or Customs of War. Specifically, it was recognized that Muslim women in Foča (southeastern Bosnia and Herzegovina ) were subjected to systematic and widespread gang rape, torture and sexual enslavement by Bosnian Serb soldiers, policemen, and members of paramilitary groups after the takeover of the city (April 1992).

The indictment was of major legal significance and was the first time that sexual assaults were investigated for the purpose of prosecution under the rubric of torture and enslavement as a crime against humanity.

The indictment was confirmed by a 2001 verdict by the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia that rape and sexual enslavement are crimes against humanity. This ruling challenged the widespread acceptance of rape and sexual enslavement of women as intrinsic part of war.

The International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia found three Bosnian Serb men guilty of rape of Bosniak (Bosnian Muslim) women and girls (some as young as 12 and 15 years of age), in Foča, eastern Bosnia-Herzegovina. Furthermore, two of the men were found guilty of the crime against humanity of sexual enslavement for holding women and girls captive in a number of de facto detention centres. Many of the women subsequently disappeared . However, Justice Richard Goldstone, chief prosecutor at the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia , commented that "rape has never been the concern of the international community." United States United States law specifies that rape in wartime is punishable by death or imprisonment under Section d(g) of the War Crimes Act of 1996 . However, a total ban on abortion is a requirement of US humanitarian aid for war victims, with no exceptions for rape, incest, or to save the life of the mother. Rome Statute The 1998 Rome Statute Explanatory Memorandum, which defines the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court , recognizes rape, sexual slavery, enforced prostitution , forced pregnancy , enforced sterilization , "or any other form of sexual violence of comparable gravity" as crime against humanity if the action is part of a widespread or systematic practice. 21st century Some of the delegates to the Global Summit to End Sexual Violence in Conflict held in 2014 In 2008, the U.N. Security Council adopted resolution 1820 , which noted that "rape and other forms of sexual violence can constitute war crimes, crimes against humanity or a constitutive act with respect to genocide".

The Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict (SRSG-SVC) was established by Security Council Resolution 1888 (2009), one in a series of resolutions which recognized the detrimental impact that sexual violence in conflict has on communities, and acknowledged that this crime undermines efforts at peace and security and rebuilding once a conflict has ended.

The office serves as the United Nations' spokesperson and political advocate on conflict-related sexual violence, and is the chair of the network UN Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict .

In April 2010, the first Special Representative, Margot Wallström of Sweden, established the Office and served as the United Nations' spokesperson and political advocate on this issue.

In September 2012, Zainab Hawa Bangura of Sierra Leone took over as the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.

The six priorities of the office are: to end impunity for sexual violence in conflict by assisting national authorities to strengthen criminal accountability, responsiveness to survivors and judicial capacity; the protection and empowerment of civilians who face sexual violence in conflict, in particular, women and girls who are targeted disproportionately by this crime; to mobilize political ownership by fostering government engagement in developing and implementing strategies to combat sexual violence; to increase recognition of rape as a tactic and consequence of war through awareness-raising activities at the international and country levels; to harmonise the UN's response by leading UN Action Against Sexual Violence in Conflict, a network of focal points from 13 UN agencies that amplify programming and advocacy on this issue in the wider UN agenda; to emphasize greater national ownership.

The Office has eight priority countries: Bosnia and Herzegovina; Central African Republic (CAR); Colombia; Côte d'Ivoire; Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC); Liberia; South Sudan and Sudan.

In March 2013, Ban Ki-moon had also recommended to the Council that women raped in war have access to abortion services. Sexual violence against women in 21st-century warfare remains a major issue in various conflicts worldwide, including but not limited to the Syrian Civil War , conflicts in the Democratic Republic of Congo , and the ongoing conflict in Yemen ; women continue to be subjected to rape, sexual slavery, and other forms of gender-based violence.

In the Yazidi genocide , ISIS perpetrated widespread violence against women, subjecting them to systemic sexual slavery, rape, and brutal forms of abuse, underscoring the heinous nature of their crimes against the Yazidi community.

In Hamas' surprise attack on Israel in 2023 , Hamas performed acts of sexual violence against Israeli women, including mutilation, rape and torture. According to an investigation of New York Times journalists, who used video footage, photographs, GPS data from mobile phones and interviews with more than 150 people, there were at least seven locations where sexual assaults and mutilations of Israeli women and girls were carried out. They concluded that these were not isolated events but part of a broader pattern in which Hamas "weaponized sexual violence" during the attacks. There is evidence of sexual violence performed against Palestinians by the Israeli Defense Force and Israeli settlers both before and after the Al Aqsa Flood on October 7th, 2023.

In the Israeli invasion of Gaza , a report published in February 2024 by the United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights found credible evidence of "egregious human rights violations" perpetrated by the Israeli Defense Forces against Palestinian women and girls.

The experts were "shocked by reports of ... deliberate targeting and extrajudicial killing" of Palestinian women and girls in Gaza.

The report condemned the "arbitrary detention" of women and children who were subjected to "inhuman and degrading treatment", including rape, strip searches, threats of sexual violence, and other forms of sexual and psychological abuse such as withholding of food and medical treatment. History Antiquity Rape has accompanied warfare in virtually every known historical era. Women's historian Gerda Lerner writes, The practice of raping the women of a conquered group has remained a feature of warfare and conquest from the second millennium B.C. to the present. It is a social practice which, like the torture of prisoners, has been resistant to "progress", to humanitarian reforms, and to sophisticated moral and ethical considerations. I suggest this is the case because it is a practice built into and essential to the structure of patriarchal institutions and inseparable from them. It is at the beginning of the system, prior to class formation, that we can see this in its purest essence.

In the Ancient Near East , wartime sexual violence and the pillaging of women were widespread practices often driven by a combination of strategic subjugation and personal gratification.

While royal records often omitted these details to focus on grand military triumphs, legal codes and prophetic literature confirm that women were systematically treated as "spoils of war". Assyrian warfare often used intimidation in campaigns against foreign territories.

When surrounding a capital city and demands of surrender proved futile, Assyrian forces resorted to attacking smaller nearby settlements, where buildings were burned and the inhabitants killed, mutilated, enslaved, or raped.

The Hebrew Bible contains several narratives and laws that acknowledge or regulate sexual violence in the context of conflict.

In Numbers 31 , the account of the war against the Midianites describes Moses ordering the execution of male captives and non-virgin women while sparing virgin girls for the Israelite soldiers a passage some scholars interpret as making sexual use of captives a normative practice in war . Other texts, such as Deuteronomy 21:10–14 , establish specific regulations for taking a "beautiful woman" from among war captives as a wife; while some commentators view these as attempts to minimize brutality, modern critics argue they effectively endorse sexual slavery and genocidal rape.

The Greek and Roman armies reportedly engaged in war rape, which is documented by ancient authors such as Homer , Herodotus , Livy and Tacitus . Ancient sources held multiple, often contradictory attitudes to sexual violence in warfare. Haaretz writer and archaeologist Terry Madenholm explains that rape did not only serve as an instrument of sexual gratification or a tool for anger relief management. For the Roman army, rape was more than just a weapon of terror; rape was regarded as the right of the victorious. It symbolized revenge, subjugation and the enslavement of the defeated. Polybius describes Roman soldiers carrying out conquest rape, while Livy portrays rape as synonymous with the capture of a city. Women and children were not the only victims of ancient wars. Rape of adult men remains one of the most closely kept secrets possibly because it was incompatible with the notion of masculinity; being sexually submissive as a man was considered utterly unmanly, even for the ancient writers.

In the Greco-Roman world a "true man" could play only an active role, and those who were submissive were stigmatized. Tacitus mentions Roman recruiting officers dragging off the most striking Batavian boys to non-consensual sex (rape), saying it was one of the causes of the Revolt of the Batavi . According to medieval historians, the Avars —who invaded Eastern Europe during Late Antiquity —harassed Wendish women and kept them in bondage as sex slaves : Each year, the Huns came to the Slavs, to spend the winter with them; then they took the wives and daughters of the Slavs and slept with them, and among the other mistreatments the Slavs were also forced to pay levies to the Huns. But the sons of the Huns, who were raised with the wives and daughters of these Wends could not finally endure this oppression anymore and refused obedience to the Huns and began, as already mentioned, a rebellion. — Chronicle of Fredegar , Book IV, Section 48, written circa 642 During Late Antiquity , India also saw countless invasions by warriors from Central Asia such as the Kushans , Hephthalites , and the Hunas .

The Huna invasions of the Indian subcontinent helped hasten the decline of the Gupta Empire .

The Huna invaders conquered Kashmir , Punjab , and finally entered into the Ganges valley , in the very heart of India, slaughtering, pillaging, looting, burning, demolishing, and raping. Many cities in India were wiped out by the onslaught of the invaders; monasteries , temples , schools, and libraries were not spared, causing immense cultural destruction to the Indian subcontinent. Accounts are consistent that the Huna warriors practiced mass rapes of women in India. Middle Ages Christians before Saladin : many civilian inhabitants of Jerusalem were sold into sexual slavery after the Siege of Jerusalem (1187) .

The Vikings were Scandinavians who raided and colonized wide areas of Europe from the late 8th century to the early 11th century. Viking settlements in Britain and Ireland are thought to have been primarily male enterprises, with a lesser role for female Vikings. British Isles' women are mentioned in old texts on the founding of Iceland, indicating that the Viking explorers had acquired wives and concubines from Britain and Ireland.

The Vikings' "rape and pillage" image is disputed, and it may have arisen due to "exaggeration and distortion" in the Middle Ages. Female slavery was common during the medieval Arab slave trade , where prisoners of war captured in battle as well as commercial slave trade from non-Arab lands sometimes ended up in sexual slavery as concubine slaves in the Arab world . Most of these slaves came from places such as Sub-Saharan Africa (mainly Zanj ), the Caucasus (mainly Circassians ), and Central Asia (mainly Tartars ). A famous incident was the Siege of Jerusalem (1187) , when Jerusalem was conquered by Muslim Ayyubid Sultanate of Egypt under Saladin . 15,000 of the Christian inhabitants of the city who could not pay the ransom were sold into slavery in the Ayyubid Sultanate . According to Imad ad-Din al-Isfahani , 7,000 of them were men and 8,000 were women and children. Contemporary Muslim sources describe the rape and enslavement in sexual slavery of non-Muslim women and girls after the fall of Jerusalem: Women and children together came to 8,000 and were quickly divided up among us, bringing a smile to Muslim faces at their lamentations. How many well-guarded women were profaned and women who had been kept hidden stripped of their modesty, and virgins dishonoured and proud women deflowered, and lovey women's red lips kissed, and happy ones made to weep. How many noblemen took them as concubines , how many ardent men blazed for one of them, and celibates were satisfied by them, and thirsty men sated by them and turbulent men able to give vent to their passion. — — Translation of the account of Saladin 's secretary Imad al-Din of the treatment of female captives following the siege of Jerusalem Before the Jurchens overthrew the Khitan , married Jurchen women and Jurchen girls were raped by Liao Khitan envoys as a custom which caused resentment by the Jurchens against the Khitan. Song Dynasty princesses committed suicide to avoid rape or were killed for resisting rape by the Jin .

The Mongols, who established the Mongol Empire across much of Eurasia, caused much destruction during their invasions . Documents written during or after Genghis Khan 's reign say that after a conquest, the Mongol soldiers looted, pillaged and raped. Some troops who submitted were incorporated into the Mongol system in order to expand their manpower. These techniques were sometimes used to spread terror and warning to others.

The Mongols invaded Hungary (Pannonia) and penetrated Austria almost to Vienna in 1241–1242. To the south of Vienna, they reached the Austrian town of Wiener Neustadt and devastated the countryside around the town, where, according to Frenchman Ivo of Narbonne, they tortured and ate Austrian civilians before the Mongols eventually retreated to Hungary. Similar accounts of Ivo of Narbonne's description of Mongol rape and cannibalism appear in Chronica Majora by Matthew Paris . However, some modern historians have suggested that medieval European sources often rhetorically depict the Mongols and other steppe peoples using barbaric tropes, which may exaggerate or misrepresent accounts of practices such as cannibalism. Rogerius of Apulia 's account of devastation and slaughter the Mongols wrought upon Europeans during the Mongol invasion of Hungary and Transylvania is in his book Carmen Miserabile .

In 1302, the army of Mamluk Sultan Al-Nasir Muhammad , who was of Kipchak Turkic descent, crushed a Bedouin rebellion in Upper Egypt and "slew mercilessly every Bedouin in the land and carried off their women captive". G. W. Murray said that "This drastic solution of the Bedouin question removed the pure Arab descendants of the Conquerors from the scene and so enabled the Beja to preserve themselves as an African race practically uninfluenced by Arab blood, while leaving the desert edges of Upper Egypt free for settlement by the Western Bedouin." The army was led by the Oirat Mongol Mamluk Sayf ad-Din Salar and Circassian Mamluk al-Baibars al-Jashnakir (Beibars).

During Timur 's invasion of Syria, in the sack of Aleppo (1400) , Ibn Taghribirdi wrote that Timur's Tatar soldiers committed mass rape on the native women of Aleppo, massacring their children and forcing the brothers and fathers of the women to watch the gang rapes which took place in the mosques. Ibn Taghribirdi said the Tatars killed all children while tying the women with ropes in Aleppo's Great mosque after the children and women tried to take refuge in the mosque. Tatar soldiers openly raped gentlewomen and virgins in public in both the small mosques and the Great Mosque.

The brothers and fathers of the women were being tortured and mutilated while forced to watch their female relatives get raped.

The corpses in the streets and mosques resulted in stink permeating Aleppo.

The women were kept naked while being gang raped repeatedly by different men. Ibn Arabshah witnessed the slaughters and rapes Timur's Tatar soldiers carried out. Mass rapes were also recorded in Timur's 1401 Sack of Damascus .

The fall of Constantinople in 1453 was a scene of mass atrocities in form of rape, followed by enslavement of women, girls and young boys in sexual slavery, and contemporary witnesses describe the pillage committed by the troops of the Muslim Ottoman army of Sultan Mehmet II . Contemporary witness reported how the marauding Ottoman soldiers raped and captured civilians inside the Hagia Sophia cathedral itself, where they: "trussed up... maidens whom the sun had not looked upon, maidens whom even their fathers had scarcely seen, and dragged away; and if they tried to resist, they were driven onward with blows. Each rapacious Turk was eager to lead his captive to a safe place, and then return to secure a second and a third prize.

The plunderers, the avengers sent by God, worked with force and speed, and in one hour everyone there had been tied up, ... women with their headcloths. Then long chains of captives could be seen leaving the church and its shrines, being herded along like cattle or flocks of sheep, weeping and wailing, with no one to show pity for them." Women and girls were taken captive and dragged to the soldier's camps: "Many of the lovelier maidens... were almost torn to death as their captors quarreled over them. Soon a long procession of ill-assorted little groups of... women bound tightly together was being dragged to the soldiers' bivouacs, there to be fought over once again." In accordance with Islamic law around slavery in Islam , the non-Muslim war captives could be sold on the slave market to a life of sexual slavery in the form of concubinage in Islam , and according to Nicolas de Nicolay, slaves were displayed naked at the city's slave market, and young girls could be purchased. Early modern period Ottoman expansion into Christian lands In the Ottoman Empire , the practice of taking Christian captives as slaves, including as sex slaves ( concubinage in Islam ), was a notable aspect of the empire's expansionist and military activities, particularly in the Balkans and Eastern Europe , since by Islamic law on war prisoners , it was halal (legitimate) to enslave kafir (non-Muslim) from dar al-Harb (non-Muslim lands) in war with dar al-Islam (the Muslim world). There are many testimonies that rape often preceded the enslavement of non-Muslim women by the Ottomans.

During the fall of Constantinople in 1453, George Sphrantzes says that people were raped inside Hagia Sophia . Critobulus described the enslavement and sexual abuse committed by the Ottoman troops inside the Hagia Sophia: Among all those outrages the profanation of Saint Sophia stood out.

In the great church an immense crowd was assembled, prauing despairingly.

The famous bronze door had been closed, and full of anguish all awaited the conquerors all waited the conquerors. Suddenly violent blows shoock and broke down the doors and a tide of blood-covered brutes swept in to the holy place. To make rooms for them they begun by using the pikes and scimitar a little; but they were in the grip of covetouness not sadism. Here, they said to themselves as they looked about, fortune awaits us.

In an instant, all who were young, good-looking and healthy were stripped, despoiled and herded. High-born women, young and gentle girls of noble family, now naked under their long hair, fell thus into slavery. Their masters bound them with whatever was at hand: sashes, belts, kerchiefs, stoles, tent ropes, camel and horse reins. With blows and kicks they were herded outside into long columns, to be led to a shameful fate and to all the extremities of the Islamic world.

The elder refugees in the Hagia Sophia were slaughtered and the women raped.

During the Siege of Vienna in 1529, the Ottoman troops pillaged the countryside around Vienna and took many surviving civilians as slaves. Peter Stern von Labach described it: After the taking of Bruck on the Leitha and the castle of Trautmannsdorf, the Sackman and those who went before him, people who have no regular pay, but live by plunder and spoil, to the number of 40,000, spread themselves far and wide over the country, as far as the Ens and into Styria, burning and slaying. Many thousands of people were murdered, or maltreated and dragged into slavery. Children were cut out of their mothers' wombs and stuck on pikes; young women abused to death, and their corpses left on the highway. God rest their souls, and grant vengeance on the bloodhounds who committed this evil. Approximately 20,000 people are estimated to have been captured and kidnapped in to slavery, of which few ever returned: the Ottomans reportedly preferred young boys and girls and members of the clergy.

The Ottoman dynasty , as was the custom in many Islamic dynasties, used female slaves for the reproduction of heirs, and the sultans therefore routinely acknowledged paternity of the sons of their slave concubines, which resulted in the concubines becoming manumitted via the umm walad principle upon the death of their enslaver and could gain significant influence within the imperial court when their sons succeeded to the throne, although their initial capture and enslavement were marked by coercion and violence.

The practice contributed to the demographic and cultural changes in the Ottoman Empire , as many of these enslaved women converted to Islam and their offspring became integrated into Ottoman society. Conquest of the Americas During the Spanish conquest and subsequent colonisation of the Americas, sexual violence against Indigenous women was documented as a frequent occurrence. Early accounts from the Caribbean, including journals from the expeditions of Christopher Columbus , describe the commodification and rape of Taíno women , who were distributed among the crew or sold.

In his own writings, Columbus noted the profitability of this trade, stating that "a hundred castellanos are as easily obtained for a woman as for a farm" and observing that there was a high demand for girls aged nine to ten.

In the regions of Mexico and Peru, the overthrow of the Aztec and Inca Empires involved systemic violence that included the widespread rape of Indigenous women. Records from the Spanish mission system in California and the Southwest further document sexual violence. Franciscan missionaries, including Junípero Serra and Luis Jayme, wrote letters to colonial authorities detailing the conduct of Spanish soldiers stationed at presidios . These reports described soldiers forcibly seizing Kumeyaay and other Indigenous women for sexual purposes, Jayme reported that soldiers at every mission had "scandalized all the Gentiles" through "continuous abuses," specifically noting the frequent rape of young native girls. Despite official prohibitions by the Spanish Crown and the Catholic Church against the mistreatment of "neophytes," enforcement was often ineffective due to the remote nature of the frontier and the dependence of the missions on military protection. Sack of Rome During the Sack of Rome in 1527, troops of the Holy Roman Emperor Charles V committed extensive sexual violence against the city's inhabitants.

The soldiers, primarily Spanish and German mercenaries, engaged in widespread rape and sexual abuse of women. Eighty Years' War During the second half of the Eighty Years' War , Brabantian towns such as Helmond , Eindhoven and Oisterwijk were repeatedly subjected to pillaging, arson, and rape committed by both the rebel Dutch States Army and the royal Spanish Army of Flanders . Münster rebellion Some women were gang-raped by the Bishop's soldiers during the defeat of the Anabaptist Münster rebellion in 1535. Thirty Years' War During the Sack of Magdeburg , many Imperial soldiers supposedly went out of control.

The invading soldiers had not received payment for their service and demanded valuables from every household they encountered. There were reports of gang rapes of minors and torture. Wars of the Three Kingdoms A significant number of women were gang-raped by Royalist and Irish Confederate troops under General Montrose who sacked Aberdeen in Scotland in 1644. Second Manchu invasion of Korea Main article: Second Manchu invasion of Korea § Aftermath In the Second Manchu invasion of Korea when Qing forces invaded the Korean Kingdom of Joseon , many Korean women were subjected to rape at the hands of the Qing forces, and as a result they were unwelcomed by their families even if they were released by the Qing after being ransomed. Manchu invasion of Xinjiang The Ush rebellion in 1765 by Uyghur Muslims against the Manchus of the Qing dynasty occurred after Uyghur women were gang raped by the servants and son of Manchu official Su-cheng. It was said that "Ush Muslims had long wanted to sleep on hides and eat their flesh" because of the rape of Uyghur Muslim women for months by the Manchu official Sucheng and his son.

The Manchu Emperor ordered that the Uyghur rebel town be massacred, the Qing forces enslaved all the Uyghur children and women and slaughtered the Uyghur men. Manchu soldiers and Manchu officials regularly having sex with or raping Uyghur women caused massive hatred and anger by Uyghur Muslims to Manchu rule.

The invasion by Jahangir Khoja was preceded by another Manchu official, Binjing, who raped a Muslim daughter of the Kokan aqsaqal from 1818 to 1820.

The Qing sought to cover up the rape of Uyghur women by Manchus to prevent anger against their rule from spreading among the Uyghurs.

During the Revolt of the Altishahr Khojas , Manchu soldiers under Qing Manchu general Zhaohui stationed in a barracks in Karasu (Black water or Heishui 黑水 in Chinese) in Yarkand cooked and ate Uyghur Muslims after butchering them. If the Manchu soldiers caught a married Uyghur Muslim couple, the Manchus would eat the Uyghur man while gang raping the Uyghur woman and then cook and eat her after. Dutch Formosa Dutch colonial forces in Taiwan raided Liuqiu island in 1636 and 1642, enslaving the population.

The women and children became servants and wives for the Dutch officers. Multiple Taiwanese aboriginal villages in frontier areas rebelled against the Dutch in the 1650s due to acts of oppression, such as when the Dutch ordered that aboriginal women be turned over to them for sex.

During the 1662 Siege of Fort Zeelandia in which Chinese Ming loyalist forces commanded by Koxinga besieged and defeated the Dutch East India Company and conquered Taiwan , Dutch male prisoners were executed. Surviving women and children were enslaved, and a number of them were sold to Chinese soldiers to become their wives or concubines. A teenage daughter of the Dutch missionary Antonius Hambroek became a concubine to Koxinga. Memory of the fate of the women and of Hambroek's daughter has been kept alive through the subsequent historiography of the period, whence it has stoked various dramatised and fictionalised retellings of the story. Russian invasion of the Amur Main article: Sino-Russian border conflicts Cattle and horses in the hundreds were looted and 243 ethnic Daur Mongolic girls and women were raped by Russian Cossacks under Yerofey Khabarov when he invaded the Amur river basin in the 1650s.

The Albazinians were told to marry Solon Evenki widows by the Board of Rites. Mongol and Manchu women were married by the Albazinians.

The wives married by the Albazinians were former jailed convicts. American Revolutionary War British soldiers and German mercenaries accompanying them raped American women and girls during the American Revolutionary War . Eyewitness testimonies and contemporary newspapers reported multiple instances of rape committed by British and German soldiers, often alongside other atrocities such as looting and the destruction of property. A Continental Army colonel described British rampages as involving "murder, rape, rapine, and violence." In 1776, The Pennsylvania Evening Post detailed the rapes of girls as young as ten and thirteen by British soldiers and reported women being taken to British camps for "sexual purposes". Four Days of Ghent During the Four Days of Ghent (13–16 November 1789), part of the Brabant Revolution , Patriot rebels tried to capture the city of Ghent from a weak Imperial Army garrison, which sought to retain the Austrian Netherlands for the Habsburg Monarchy .

After the first day of fighting was over, and the night fell, plundering started. Primarily the Imperial troops, most notably the "Clerfayt" Regiment, badly misbehaved by robbing, raping and killing. : 129–131 Both Imperial and Patriot sources report an astonishing lack of discipline amongst the Imperial soldiers, and that their crimes committed against civilians at the early stages of combat was a crucial factor in motivating the civilian population of Ghent to side with the rebels. : 133–134 Ottoman-Saudi War The historian Abd al-Rahman al-Jabarti recorded in his history, The Marvelous Compositions of Biographies and Events ( ‘Aja’ib al-athar fi’l-tarajim wa’l-akhbar ), that Ottoman forces in the Ottoman-Saudi War took Wahhabi Saudi women and girls as slaves, despite them being Muslim and enslavement of Muslims being illegal.

The jihadist Islamist Saudi Nasir al-Fahd mentioned the Ottoman enslavement of Saudi women and girls in his book attacking the Ottomans, The Ottoman State and the Position of the Call of Sheikh Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab on it , published in 1993. Circassian genocide Main article: Circassian genocide Cossacks raped Muslim Circassian women. Russians raped Circassian girls during the 1877 Russo-Turkish war from the Circassian refugees who were settled in the Ottoman Balkans. Indian Rebellion of 1857 Main article: Indian Rebellion of 1857 § Death toll and atrocities During the Indian Rebellion of 1857 , known as " India's First War of Independence " to the Indians and as the "Sepoy Mutiny" to the British, Indian sepoys rebelled en masse against the East India Company 's rule over India . Incidents of rape committed by Indian sepoys against British women and children were reported in the English press , particularly after British civilians fell into Indian hands after sieges such as at Cawnpore . However, after the rebellion was suppressed, detailed analyses by the British government concluded that although Indian sepoys had engaged in massacres of British civilians after they captured them, there had never been one single instance of war rape committed by the sepoys. One such account published by The Times , regarding an incident where 48 British girls as young as fourteen and ten had been raped by the Indian sepoys in Delhi, was criticised as an obvious fabrication by Karl Marx , who pointed out that the story was written by a clergyman in Bangalore , while the rebellion was mostly confined to the Punjab region.

As British troops suppressed the rebellion, angered by reports of massacres and rapes of British civilians, reprisals were often carried out against Indian civilians, particularly at Cawnpore. Indian women were often a target of rape by the enraged soldiers. Boxer Rebellion Main article: Boxer Rebellion § Occupation, looting, and atrocities During the Boxer Rebellion , the Yihetuan committed several massacres of foreign civilians (motivated by their anti-Christian and anti-Western sentiment) but were said to avoid raping women.

The majority population of the hundreds of thousands of people living in the inner "Tartar" city of Beijing during the Qing were Manchus and Mongol bannermen from the Eight Banners after they were moved there in 1644.

During the Boxer Rebellion in 1900, western and Japanese soldiers mass raped Manchu women and Mongol banner women. Indeed, it appeared common practise for the invading soldiers to capture women, regardless of class or creed, to rape them. This was done by forcing them to work as sex slaves in rape-manors they had established in the Beijing hutongs (alleys formed by siheyuan residences). This excerpt from the "Miscellaneous Notes about the Boxers", written by Japanese journalist Sawara Tokusuke, describes one such rape-manor: The Allied forces would frequently capture women, no matter virtuous, wretched, old or young, and would, as much as they could, displace them to Biaobei alleys and to live in row houses there as prostitutes for the soldiery.

The West end of this alley the path would have been blocked off, in order to prevent escape, the East end was the only way in or out. This way was guarded. Any person from the Allied forces could enter for pleasure and rape to his heart's desire. — Sawara 268 Sawara also reports on the seven daughters of the Manchu bannerman Yulu 裕禄 of the Hitara clan, the Viceroy of the province of Zhili (present day Hebei). Yulu was on good terms with the invaders. He was a man who always sought to create good impressions, and due to this, the British Consul at Tianjin offered him asylum on board of one of Her Majesty's ships for his loyalty to the British (Fleming 84).

Later in the war Yulu perished in the battle for Yangcun.

When Beijing fell, the Allies abducted all seven of his daughters and then sent them to the Heavenly Palace in Beijing where they were violated repeatedly. Then they were held captive as sex slaves for the soldiers in one of the rape-manors mentioned above (Sawara 268). Another story relays the fate that befell the women of Chongqi's household. Chongqi 崇绮 was a nobleman from the Mongolian Alute clan and scholar of high standing in the Imperial Manchu court. He was also the father-in-law of the previous Emperor. His wife and one of his daughters, much like Yulu's daughters, were captured by the invading soldiers. They were taken to the Heavenly Temple, held captive and were then brutally raped by dozens of Eight Nations Alliance soldiers during the entire course of the Beijing occupation. Only after the Eight Nations Alliance's retreat did the mother and daughter return home, only to hang themselves from the rafters. Upon this discovery, Chongqi, out of despair, soon followed suit (Sawara 266). He hanged himself on 26 August 1900. His son, Baochu, and many other family members committed suicide shortly after (Fang 75). Many Manchu bannermen in Beijing supported the Boxers in the Boxer Rebellion and shared their anti-foreign sentiment.

The Manchu bannermen were devastated by the fighting during the First Sino-Japanese War and the Boxer Rebellion, sustaining massive casualties during the wars and subsequently being driven into extreme suffering and hardship.

The forces of the Eight-Nation Alliance , upon their capture of Beijing , went on violent rampages against Manchu civilians, looting, raping, and murdering numerous civilians they came across.

The number of women who committed suicide numbered in the thousands. A western Journalist, George Lynch, said "there are things that I must not write, and that may not be printed in Great Britain, which would seem to show that this Western civilization of ours is merely a veneer over savagery." All of the eight nations in the alliance engaged in looting and war rape. Luella Miner wrote that the behavior of the Russians and French was particularly appalling. Qing women and girls killed themselves in order to avoid being raped.

The French commander dismissed the rapes, attributing them to the "gallantry of the French soldiers". Manchu property including horses and cattle were looted while their villages were burnt by the Russian Cossacks as Manchus were driven out as refugees and slaughtered by Russian cossacks according to S. M. Shirokogoroff when he was in Heilongjiang along the Amur river garrison of Heihe (Aihun). Manchu banner garrisons were annihilated on 5 roads by Russians as they suffered most of the casualties. Manchu Shoufu killed himself during the battle of Peking and the Manchu Lao She's father was killed by western soldiers in the battle as the Manchu banner armies of the Center Division of the Guards Army, Tiger Spirit Division and Peking Field force in the Metropolitan banners were slaughtered by the western soldiers. Baron von Ketteler, the German diplomat was murdered by Captain Enhai, a Manchu from the Tiger Spirit Division of Aisin Gioro Zaiyi, Prince Duan and the Inner city Legation Quarters and Catholic cathedral were both attacked by Manchu bannermen. Manchu bannermen were slaughtered by the Eight Nation Alliance all over Manchuria and Beijing because most of the Manchu bannermen supported the Boxers in the Boxer rebellion.

The clan system of the Manchus in Aigun was obliterated by the despoliation of the area at the hands of the Russian invaders. Russo-Japanese war Main article: Russo-Japanese War It was reported in 1905 that many Russian women were raped by Japanese troops causing widespread venereal disease in many Japanese troops after the Russo-Japanese War . German South-West Africa In German South-West Africa during the Herero rebellion against German rule (and the subsequent Herero and Namaqua Genocide ), German soldiers regularly engaged in gang rapes before killing the women or leaving them in the desert to die; a number of Herero women were also violently forced into involuntary prostitution . : 31 Xinhai revolution Main article: Xinhai revolution In October 1911, during the Xinhai revolution , revolutionaries stormed the Manchu quarter of Xi'an . Most of the city's 20,000 Manchus were killed.

The Hui Muslim community was divided in its support for the revolution.

The Hui Muslims of Shaanxi supported the revolutionaries, while the Hui Muslims of Gansu supported the Qing.

The native Hui Muslims (Mohammedans) of Xi'an (Shaanxi province) joined the Han Chinese revolutionaries in slaughtering the Manchus. Some wealthy Manchus survived by being ransomed . Wealthy Han Chinese enslaved Manchu girls and poor Han Chinese troops seized young Manchu women as wives. Hui Muslims also seized young Manchu girls and raised them as Muslims. A British missionary who witnessed the massacre commented that "Old and young, men and women, children alike, were all butchered ... Houses were plundered and then burnt; those who would fain have laid hidden till the storm was past, were forced to come out into the open.

The revolutionaries, protected by a parapet of the wall, poured a heavy, unceasing, relentless fire into the doomed Tartar (Manchu) city, those who tried to escape thence into the Chinese city were cut down as they emerged from the gates." World War I "Remember Belgium", an American propaganda poster printed during World War I, depicting the fate of Belgium .

The rape of the young girl representing Belgium is implied. Rapes were allegedly committed during the German advance through Belgium in the first months of the war.

After the war, the historian Harold D. Lasswell dismissed the rape allegations as propaganda in his 1927 Freudian-oriented study, "Propaganda Technique in the World War".

In September 1914, the French government set up a commission, that was also seen in Belgium to investigate reports of rape committed by German soldiers, however as historian Ruth Harris has documented the investigations were more to fuel narratives of nationalism and cultural hatred towards Germany.

The individual stories of the women that were impacted were used to justify the war and to market it to the civilians. : 13 Bavarian Soviet Republic Manfred Freiherr von Killinger related how, during the defeat of the Bavarian Soviet Republic , he ordered a female Communist sympathizer to be whipped "until there was not a white spot left on her backside". Armenian genocide Rape was widespread during the Armenian genocide , which was committed by the Ottoman Turks.

During the death marches of Armenian civilians through Anatolia in 1915, Turkish soldiers frequently raped and killed Armenian women and children.

In many cases, Turkish civilians also participated in these crimes.

During World War II and in its immediate aftermath, war rape occurred in a range of situations, ranging from institutionalized sexual slavery to war rapes associated with specific battles. Asia Main articles: American war crimes , British war crimes , Japanese war crimes , Soviet war crimes , Futsukaichi Rest Home , Rape of Nanjing , and Rape during the occupation of Japan Rangoon , Burma . 8 August 1945. A young ethnic Chinese woman from one of the Imperial Japanese Army 's "comfort battalions" is interviewed by an Allied officer. Imperial Japanese Army Main article: Comfort women The term " comfort women " is a euphemism for the estimated 200,000, mostly Korean, Chinese, Vietnamese, Burmese, Japanese, Taiwanese and Filipino women who were forced to serve as sex slaves in Japanese military brothels during World War II. Chuo University professor Yoshiaki Yoshimi states there were about 2,000 centers where as many as 200,000 Japanese, Chinese, Korean, Filipino, Taiwanese, Burmese, Indonesian, Timorese, Papuan, Micronesian, Dutch and Australian women were interned and used as sex slaves. There were comfort women stations in China, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Japan, North and South Korea, Malaysia, Indonesia, Philippines, Burma, Thailand, Cambodia, Vietnam, New Guinea, the Kurile Islands, and Sakhalin.

In the Nanjing Massacre , Japanese soldiers sexually assaulted Chinese women who were trapped in the city of Nanjing when it fell to the Japanese on 13 December 1937.

The International Military Tribunal for the Far East estimated that 20,000 women and children were raped or otherwise sexually assaulted during the first month of the occupation. Iris Chang estimated that the number of Chinese women raped by Japanese soldiers ranged from 20,000 to 80,000.

The Japanese forced Vietnamese women to become comfort women—and, with Burmese, Indonesian, Thai and Filipino women—they made up a notable portion of Asian comfort women in general. Japanese use of Malaysian and Vietnamese women as comfort women was corroborated by many different testimonies.

In Java, the Japanese heavily recruited Javanese girls as comfort women and brought them to New Guinea, Malaysia, Thailand and other areas foreign to Indonesia besides using them in Java itself.

When recruiting these girls, the Japanese would lie to the Javanese telling them that their girls would become waitresses and actresses.

The Japanese destroyed many documents related to their rape of Indonesian Javanese girls at the end of the war, so the true extent of the mass rape is uncountable, but testimony witnesses records the names and accounts of Indonesian Javanese comfort women.

In one instance, the Japanese tried to disguise the Javanese comfort girls they were raping as red cross nurses with red cross armbands when they surrendered to Australian soldiers in Kupang, Timor.

In Bali, the Japanese sexually harassed Balinese women when they arrived and started forcing Balinese women into brothels for prostitution, with Balinese men and Chinese men used as recruiters for the Balinese women. All of the brothels in Bali were staffed by Balinese women. Melanesian women from New Guinea were also used as comfort women. Local women were recruited from Rabaul as comfort women, along with a small number of mixed Japanese-Papuan women born to Japanese fathers and Papuan mothers. Around 100 Micronesian women from island of Truk in the Carolines were also used as comfort women. An unknown number of white females and children were either raped or sexually assaulted at various locations such as Banoeng, Padang, Tarakan, Menado, Flores island and Blora, at the beginning of the Japanese initial invasion and occupation.

In the Bangka Island , most of the Australian nurses captured were raped before they were murdered. J. F. van Wagtendonk and the Dutch Broadcast Foundation estimated a total of 400 Dutch girls were taken from the camps to become comfort women. Japanese soldiers raped Indonesian women and Dutch women in the Netherlands East Indies. Many of the women were infected with STDs as a result. Suharto silenced public discussion in Indonesian on Japanese war crimes in Indonesia in order to stop anti-Japanese sentiment building up but it happened regardless when the movie Romusha came out in 1973 and the Peristiwa Malari (Malari affair) riots broke out in Indonesia in 1974 against Japan. Suharto also sought to silence discussion on Japanese war crimes due to Indonesia's own war crimes in East Timor after 1975, but Indonesians started talking about Indonesian comfort women in the 1990s following the example of Korea. Mardyiem, a Javanese Indonesian comfort woman talked about what happened to her after Indonesian comfort women were interviewed by Japanese lawyers, after decades of being forced to stay silent. Three major revolts happened against Japan by Indonesians in Java. Japanese forced Indonesians of West Java in Cirebon to hand over a massive quota of rice to the Japanese military with Japanese officers using brutality to extract even more than the official quota.

The Indonesians in Cirebon rebelled twice and targeted Indonesian collaborator bureaucrats and Japanese officers in 1944. Japan killed a lot of Indonesian rebels while crushing them with deadly force.

In Sukmana, Singapurna, the Tasikmalaya regency, the conservative religious teacher Kiai Zainal Mustafa told his followers that in the month when Muhammad was born they would gain divine protection when he gave a sign.

In February 1943, Japanese Kempeitai caught wind of what was happening and came to the area but the roads were blocked to stop them.

The Indonesian villagers and students began to fight the Japanese and seized the sabre of the Japanese chief to kill him. More Japanese arrived and 86 Japanese and 153 Indonesian villagers died in the fighting.

The Japanese then arrested Zainal and 22 others for execution. Supriyadi lead a Peta mutiny against the Japanese in February 1945. Japanese raped Malay comfort women, but UMNO leader Najib Razak blocked all attempts by other UMNO members like Mustapha Yakub at asking Japan for compensation and apologies.

The threat of Japanese rape against Chitty girls led Chitty families to let Eurasians, Chinese and full-blooded Indians to marry Chitty girls and stop practicing endogamy. Japanese soldiers raped Indian Tamil girls and women that were forced to work on the Burma railway. This led to Japanese soldiers contracting venereal disease such as chancroid , syphilis and gonorrhoea . French Army Vietnamese civilians were robbed, raped and killed by French soldiers in Saigon when they came back in August 1945. Vietnamese women were also raped in North Vietnam by the French like in Bảo Hà, Bảo Yên District , Lào Cai province , and Phu Lu, which caused 400 Vietnamese who were trained by the French to defect on 20 June 1948. Buddhist statues were looted and Vietnamese were robbed, raped and tortured by the French after the French crushed the Viet Minh in northern Vietnam in 194 –1948 forcing the Viet Minh to flee into Yunnan, China, for sanctuary and aid from the Chinese Communists. A French reporter was told by Vietnamese violate notables, "We know what war always is, We understand your soldiers taking our animals, our jewelry, our Buddhas; it is normal. We are resigned to their raping out wives and our daughters; war has always been like that. But we object to being treated in the same way, not only our sons, but ourselves, old men and dignitaries that we are." Vietnamese rape victims became "half insane". Australian Army A former prostitute recalled that as soon as Australian troops arrived in Kure in early 1946, they "dragged young women into their jeeps, took them to the mountain, and then raped them. I heard them screaming for help nearly every night". United States Army A large number of rapes were committed by U.S. forces during the Battle of Okinawa in 1945.

The Judge Advocate General's office reports that there were 971 convictions for rape in the U.S. military from January 1942 to June 1947, which includes a portion of the occupation. Okinawan historian Oshiro Masayasu (former director of the Okinawa Prefectural Historical Archives) writes: Soon after the U.S. marines landed, all the women of a village on Motobu Peninsula fell into the hands of American soldiers.

At the time, there were only women, children and old people in the village, as all the young men had been mobilized for the war. Soon after landing, the marines "mopped up" the entire village, but found no signs of Japanese forces. Taking advantage of the situation, they started "hunting for women" in broad daylight and those who were hiding in the village or nearby air raid shelters were dragged out one after another. According to Toshiyuki Tanaka, 76 cases of rape or rape-murder were reported during the first five years of the American occupation of Okinawa. However, he asserts this is probably not the true figure, as most cases were unreported.

When the Japanese surrendered, they anticipated that widespread rapes would occur during the following occupation and made rapid efforts to set up brothels to curb this. Despite this precaution, 1,336 rapes reportedly occurred during the first 10 days of the occupation of Kanagawa prefecture , although a similar figure has also been given for the whole of Japan. Individual instances of rape by members of the United States Army in Japan were reported while their forces were stationed in post-war Japan , such as the Yumiko-chan incident and the 1995 Okinawa rape incident . Some historians state that mass rapes took place during the initial phase of the occupation. For instance, Fujime Yuki has stated that 3,500 rapes occurred in the first month after American troops landed. Tanaka relates that in Yokohama, the capital of the prefecture, there were 119 known rapes in September 1945.

At least seven academic books and many other works state that there were 1,336 reported rapes during the first 10 days of the occupation of Kanagawa Prefecture . Walsh states that this figure originated from Yuki Tanaka's book Hidden Horrors , and resulted from that author misreading the crime figures in their source.

The source states that the Japanese Government recorded 1,326 criminal incidents of all types involving American forces, of which an unspecified number were rapes.

The Kokura incident (小倉黒人米兵集団脱走事件) was a mass rape event by mutinous American soldiers of the 24th Infantry Regiment (United_States) against Japanese women in the city of Kokura in July 1950, after they rioted against deployment to Korea. 22 year old American soldier James L. Clark from Marks, Missouri killed 4 Japanese who belonged to a single family, two sons and their parents on 4 July, 1950 in Kokura, leaving only Keiko, a 7 year old girl to survive. James Clark's original death sentence was commuted and he was not executed.

On 11 July, 1950 in Kokura, 75, 100, 200 or 250 soldiers of the US 24th Infantry Regiment which was at Camp Jōno and ordered to deploy into the Korean war rioted and escaped their camp and went on a raping spree in Kokura against Japanese women and killed a Japanese man. “Testimony revealed in the 1975 Fukuoka Prefectural edition of the Asahi suggests that some women were sexually assaulted in front of their husbands.” The mass rapes being committed by the US soldiers on Japanese women were mentioned in a US military police report to the Fukuoka Area Provost Marshal, chief of Kyushu Civil affairs region, on 17 July 1950. US military censored all mention of the rapes in Japanese media. A novel was written based on the events by a Japanese man from Kokura, Seichō Matsumoto . Duchess Harris wrote an essay “How negative stereotypes in material culture impact global politics”, criticising Matsumoto's novelisation for focusing on race in the incident, saying “The image of the Black GI as rapist has become something of a staple in Japanese pornography and films about the Occupation.

The Black rapist trope also appears in Matsumoto Seicho’s short story, Kuroji no e.” Others also criticised his racial focus. Soviet Army During the Soviet invasion of Manchuria , Soviet and Mongolian soldiers attacked and raped Japanese civilians, often encouraged by the local Chinese population who were resentful of Japanese rule.

The local Chinese population sometimes even joined in these attacks against the Japanese population with the Soviet soldiers.

In one famous example, during the Gegenmiao massacre , Soviet soldiers and armed local Chinese rioters raped and massacred over one thousand Japanese women and children. Property of the Japanese were also looted by the Soviet soldiers and Chinese. Many Japanese women married themselves to local Manchurian men to protect themselves from persecution by Soviet soldiers. These Japanese women mostly married Chinese men and became known as "stranded war wives" ( zanryu fujin ). According to British and American reports, Soviet Red Army troops also looted and terrorized the local people of Shenyang located in Manchuria . A foreigner witnessed Soviet troops, formerly stationed in Berlin, who were allowed by the Soviet military to go into the city of Shenyang "for three days of rape and pillage".

The Soviet Army's reputation in the region was affected for years to come. Konstantin Asmolov of the Center for Korean Research of the Russian Academy of Sciences dismisses Western accounts of Soviet violence against civilians in the Far East as exaggeration and rumor and contends that accusations of mass crimes by the Red Army inappropriately extrapolate isolated incidents regarding the nearly 2,000,000 Soviet troops in the Far East into mass crimes. According to him, such accusations are refuted by the documents of the time, from which it is clear that such crimes were far less of a problem than in Germany. Asmolov further asserts that the Soviets prosecuted their perpetrators while prosecution of German and Japanese "rapists and looters" in WWII was virtually unknown. Japanese women in Manchukuo were repeatedly raped by Russian soldiers every day including underage girls from the families of Japanese who worked for the military and the Manchukuo rail at Beian airport and Japanese military nurses.

The Russians seized Japanese civilian girls at Beian airport where there were a total of 1000 Japanese civilians, repeatedly raping 10 girls each day as recalled by Yoshida Reiko and repeatedly raped 75 Japanese nurses at the Sunwu military hospital in Manchukuo during the occupation.

The Russians rejected all the pleading by the Japanese officers to stop the rapes.

The Japanese were told by the Russians that they had to give their women for rape as war spoils. Soviet soldiers raped Japanese women from a group of Japanese families that were with Yamada Tami that attempted to flee their settlements in 14 August and go to Mudanjiang. Another group of Japanese women that were with Ikeda Hiroko that on 15 August tried to flee to Harbin but returned to their settlements were raped by Soviet soldiers. Europe British Army Italian statistics record eight rapes and nineteen attempted rapes by British service members in Italy between September 1943, when the invasion of Sicily occurred, and December 1945.

In addition, British forces in Allied-occupied Germany committed rapes and other forms of sexual assault during the last months of World War II. Though a high priority for the Royal Military Police , some commanders proved reluctant to prosecute their men. There were also reports of sexual assaults committed by British soldiers in Belgium and the Netherlands after their liberation from German occupation, and a number of men were convicted of these crimes while fraternizing with Dutch and Belgian families during the winter of 1944–45. Italian Army During the Axis occupation of Greece , the Royal Italian Army committed numerous rapes and other forms of sexual assault against local Greek women.

The Wehrmacht also established a system of military brothels, in which young women and girls from occupied territories were forced into prostitution under harsh conditions. Sexual violence against Soviet women by German soldiers was widespread on the Eastern Front.

In some occupied localities, nearly all women were raped by German soldiers, and in several instances, entire military units participated in extreme acts of sexual violence.

In early August 1941, the command of the German Ninth Army reported a notable increase in incidents of plundering and rape, even within the combat zone.

In the Soviet Union women were kidnapped by German forces for prostitution as well; one report by the International Military Tribunal writes "in the city of Smolensk the German Command opened a brothel for officers in one of the hotels into which hundreds of women and girls were driven; they were mercilessly dragged down the street by their arms and hair." German soldiers committed rapes in Yugoslavia. According to the State Commission for Investigation of Crimes Committed by the Occupation Forces and their Collaborators German soldiers committed 772 acts of rape during the Axis occupation of Serbia .

During punitive operations on the Croatian island of Brač , German soldiers committed rapes alongside arson and massacres, as reprisals for casualties among their troops. Yugoslavian women were reportedly placed into brothels, and a 1941 document from the Osijek archives discussing plans for multiple brothels in Osijek, as well as the required sanitation procedures, has also been found.

Although on a smaller scale than on the Eastern Front, German soldiers also committed rape on the Western Front and in German-occupied countries in Western and Northern Europe. Reports of rape by German soldiers emerged from Czech, France, Denmark, the Netherlands, and Belgium.

In his book " Sex Crimes Under the Wehrmacht ", author David Raub Snyder stated that a large number of Italian, French, and even German women were raped by Wehrmacht soldiers during the war. He argued that there is no evidence to suggest that non-Slavic women were spared from rape by German soldiers any more than Slavic women. He also noted that the lenient sentences imposed on German soldiers charged with rape were not unique to the Eastern Front , as many courts also handed down light punishments in cases involving the rape of non-Slavic women, including French, Italian, and German women.

During the German occupation of the British Channel Islands , some German soldiers were charged with rape. According to professors of Regional State Archives in Hamar , following German invasion of Norway and during the German occupation of Norway , German soldiers committed numerous rapes against Norwegian women at gunpoint with impunity, while the local police ignored the reports of the rapes.

During the Distomo massacre , German soldiers engaged in mass rape, torture, and mutilation against local Greek women and girls in the village. French Colonial Army Main article: Marocchinate French Moroccan troops, known as Goumiers , committed rapes and other atrocities in Italy after the Battle of Monte Cassino and in Germany.

At the end of World War II, Red Army soldiers are estimated to have raped around 2,000,000 German women and girls. Norman Naimark , a historian and fellow at the conservative Hoover Institution , writes in The Russians in Germany: A History of the Soviet Zone of Occupation, 1945–1949 that although the exact number of women and girls who were raped by members of the Red Army in the months preceding the capitulation, and in the years following it, will never be known, their numbers are likely to be in the hundreds of thousands, quite possibly as high as the two million victims estimated by Barbara Johr, in Befreier und Befreite . Many of these victims were raped repeatedly. Atina Grossman in her article in October describes how until early 1945, the abortions in Germany were illegal except for medical and eugenic reasons and so doctors opened up and started performing abortions to rape victims for which only an affidavit was requested from a woman. It was also typical that women specified their reasons for abortions as being mostly socio-economic (inability to raise another child), rather than moral or ethical. A female Soviet war correspondent described what she had witnessed: "The Russian soldiers were raping every German female from eight to eighty. It was an army of rapists." The majority of the rapes were committed in the Soviet occupation zone and an estimated two million German women were raped by Soviet soldiers. According to historian William Hitchcock, in numerous cases women were victims of repeated rapes with some women being raped as many as 60 to 70 times. A minimum of 100,000 women are believed to have been raped in Berlin , based on surging abortion rates in the following months and on hospital reports written at the time, with an estimated 10,000 women dying in the aftermath. Female deaths resulting from rapes committed by Soviet soldiers stationed in Germany are estimated to total 240,000. Antony Beevor describes it as the "greatest phenomenon of mass rape in history", and he has concluded that at least 1.4 million women were raped in East Prussia, Pomerania and Silesia alone. According to Natalya Gesse, Soviet soldiers raped German females who were anywhere from eight to 80 years old. Liberated female Polish and Soviet Ostarbeiters were also raped. Antony Beevor estimates that up to half of all rape victims were victims of gang rapes. Naimark states that not only did each victim have to carry the trauma with her for the rest of her days, it also inflicted a massive collective trauma on the East German nation. Naimark concludes "The social psychology of women and men in the Soviet zone of occupation was marked by the crime of rape from the first days of the occupation, through the founding of the GDR in the fall of 1949, until, one could argue, the present." Some 90% of raped Berlin women in 1945 contracted sexually transmitted infections, and 3.7% of all children born in Germany from 1945 to 1946 had Soviet fathers.

The history of the Soviet rape of German women was considered a taboo subject until after the dissolution of the USSR and East Germany.

On the actions of Pakistan army he said "They'd keep the infantry back and put artillery ahead and they would shell the hospitals and schools. And that caused absolute chaos in the town. And then the infantry would go in and begin to segregate the women. Apart from little children, all those were sexually matured would be segregated ... And then the women would be put in the compound under guard and made available to the troops ... Some of the stories they told were appalling. Being raped again and again and again. A lot of them died in those camps". Bangladeshi women were raped during the Bangladesh Liberation War in 1971 by the Pakistan army during night raids on villages. Pakistani sources claim the number is much lower, though having not completely denied rape incidents. One work that has included direct experiences from the women raped is Ami Birangana Bolchi ( The Voices of War Heroines ) by Nilima Ibrahim .

The word Birangona (war heroine) is a title given, by Sheikh Mujibur Rahman after the war, to the women raped and tortured during the war. This was a conscious effort to alleviate any social stigma the women might face in the society. How successful this effort was is doubtful, though.

In June 2005, the United States Department of State organized a conference titled "South Asia in Crisis: United States Policy, 1961–1972" where Sarmila Bose , published a paper suggesting that the casualties and rape allegations in the war have been greatly exaggerated for political purposes. This work has been criticized in Bangladesh and her research has been attacked by expatriate Bengalis.

During the war Bengali nationalists also indulged in the mass rape of ethnic Bihari Muslim women, since the Bihari Muslim community had remained loyal to the cause of a united Pakistan. Anthony Mascarenhas, published a newspaper article in June 1971, in The Sunday Times , London on 13 June 1971 titled "Genocide".

The article was the first that exposed the brutal crackdown by the Pakistan army. It also highlighted the rape of Bihari women and other atrocities committed against them by Bengalis.

The Sunday Times editor Harold Evans wrote "He'd been shocked by the Bengali outrages in March, but he maintained that what the army was doing was altogether worse and on a grander scale". 1974 to 1992 In 1974, during the invasion of Cyprus by Turkey , Greek victims of rape were treated and received abortions at the British RAF bases at Akrotiri . Other documented instances of war rape include the First Liberian Civil War , and in East Timor during the occupation by Indonesia in 1975. It has been reported that in Peru , throughout the 12-year internal conflict , women were frequent victims of sustained war rape perpetrated by government security forces and the Shining Path . Gulf War The Soviet forces abducted Afghan women in helicopters while flying in the country in search of mujahideen.

In November 1980 a number of such incidents had taken place in various parts of the country, including Laghman and Kama. Soviet soldiers as well as KhAD agents kidnapped young women from the city of Kabul and the areas of Darul Aman and Khair Khana, near the Soviet garrisons, to rape them. Women who returned home were considered 'dishonoured' by their families. Tigray War This section is an excerpt from Sexual violence in the Tigray war . This article needs to be updated .

The reason given is: new information since September 2021 . Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information. ( October 2022 ) Protestor holding sign in support of women in Tigray Sexual violence in the Tigray War included, according to the United Nations Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict , Pramila Patten , people forced to rape family members, "sex in exchange for basic commodities", and "increases in the demand for emergency contraception and testing for sexually transmitted infections ".

Since the 2021 Myanmar coup d'état , the military has escalated its systemic use of sexual violence, especially against women and political prisoners. Survivors face societal and legal challenges in reporting their crimes.

During the Tar Taing massacre in March 2023, army troops raped and sexually assaulted at least 3 women before executing them. 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine Main article: Sexual violence in the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine During the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine , Ukrainian officials, rights groups, and international media reported growing evidence of sexual violence used by Russian military against Ukrainian women. Survivors of Russian occupation of the areas around Kyiv, such as Bucha , reported gang-rapes, assaults taking place at gunpoint, and rapes committed in front of children. Lyudmyla Denisova , Ukraine's Human Rights Commissioner, stated that sexual violence against civilians was weaponized by Russian soldiers as part of what she referred to as "genocide of Ukrainian people". According to Denisova, as of 6 April 2022, a special telephone helpline had received at least 25 reports of rape of women and girls from Bucha, aged between 14 and 24.

The Security Service of Ukraine posted a recording allegedly of a Russian woman encouraging her deployed partner to rape Ukrainian women as long as he uses protection.

In October 2022, a UN official stated that Russia was using rape as part of its "military strategy", and that the actual number of victims was likely far higher than the official statistics. 2023 Hamas-led attack on Israel Main article: Sexual and gender-based violence in the October 7 attacks This section needs expansion . You can help by adding missing information . ( May 2026 ) The UN's Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict , Pramila Patten , reported in March 2024, with the "full cooperation" of the Israeli government, that there was "clear and convincing information" that Israeli hostages in Gaza had experienced sexual violence, and that there was "reasonable grounds to believe that conflict-related sexual violence occurred during the 7 October attacks".

The report was not a full investigation, but designed to "collect and verify allegations", and the team stated that their conclusions fell below the legal threshold of being "beyond a reasonable doubt ".

The UN Commission of Inquiry (CoI) subsequently published a legally mandated report in June 2024 that stated there was "a pattern indicative of sexual violence by Palestinian forces during the attack", but that it was unable to independently verify allegations of rape due to Israel's obstruction of its investigation. It also found some of the allegations to be false and found "no credible evidence" that Palestinian militants had received direct orders to commit sexual violence.

On 12 April 2024, the European Union sanctioned military and special forces wings of Hamas and the armed wing of Palestinian Islamic Jihad due to their responsibility for the alleged sexual violence on 7 October.

The EU said the two groups' fighters "committed widespread sexual and gender-based violence in a systematic manner, using it as a weapon of war." On 23 April 2024, the annual UN Secretary-General's report called on the Israeli government to allow access to "relevant UN bodies to carry out a fully-fledged investigation into all alleged violations".

In July 2025, Hamas was added to the UN's sexual violence blacklist.

In May 2024, Karim Ahmad Khan , chief prosecutor of the International Criminal Court , announced that he was seeking to charge Hamas leaders Yahya Sinwar , Ismail Haniyeh and Mohammed Deif with war crimes and crimes against humanity, including rape and sexual assault against those held captive in Gaza. Deif was indicted for rape and other forms of sexual violence as a war crime and a crime against humanity on 21 November, by which time cases against Haniyeh and Sinwar had been discontinued due to their deaths. Gaza war Main article: Sexual and gender-based violence against Palestinians during the Gaza war In its June 2024 investigative report, the UN's Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the Occupied Palestinian Territory (CoI) concluded, The frequency, prevalence and severity of sexual and gender-based crimes perpetrated against Palestinians since 7 October across the Occupied Palestinian Territories (OPT) indicate that specific forms of Sexual and gender-based violence (SGBV) are part of Israeli Security Forces (ISF) operating procedures. Causes Wars and civil conflicts can create a "culture of violence" or a "culture of impunity" towards human rights abuses of civilians.

During periods of armed conflict, there are structures, actors, and processes at a number of levels that affect the likelihood of violence against civilians . Sexual violence is one of many types of violence directed against civilians in wartime situations. Among some armies, looting of civilian areas is considered a way for soldiers to supplement their often meager income, which can be unstable if soldiers are not paid on time. Some militias that cannot afford to adequately pay their troops promote pillaging as a compensation for victory, and rape of civilians can be seen as a reward for winning battles. According to UNICEF , "systematic rape is often used as a weapon of war in ethnic cleansing ," having been used in various armed conflicts throughout the twentieth century alone, including Bosnia and Herzegovina , Cambodia , Uganda , and Vietnam .

In 2008, the United Nations Security Council argued that "women and girls are particularly targeted by the use of sexual violence, including as a tactic of war to humiliate, dominate, instil fear in, disperse and/or forcibly relocate civilian members of a community or ethnic group." Inger Skjelsbæ carried out a review of 140 publications explaining wartime sexual violence. She argues that explanations must take account of the increased general risk of rape, that certain groups of women are at more risk of rape, and that men are raped. : 83 She distinguishes three classes of explanations of rape: essentialist, that view rape during war as an intrinsic part of male behavior; structuralist, that view rape as having a political component; and social constructionist, that view rape as having a particular meaning depending on context.

In the structuralist framework, rape may be seen as a form of torture designed to destroy a woman's identity as a woman within a particular culture, or to destroy an ethnic community itself. She cites examples of women being raped in front of other civilians, and different groups of women being more likely to experience sexual violence.

In the social constructionist framework, she cites work that argues that the act of sexual intercourse can be used to feminize one participant and masculinize another, so the rape of men can seem to damage the identity of those who are raped by feminizing them. : 77 Dara Kay Cohen argues that some military groups use gang rape to bond soldiers and create a sense of cohesion within units, particularly when troops are recruited by force. Amnesty International argues that in modern conflicts rape is used deliberately as a military strategy. Amnesty International describes war rape as a "weapon of war" or a "means of combat" used for the purpose of conquering territory by expelling the population therefrom, decimating remaining civilians by destroying their links of affiliations, by the spread of AIDS, and by eliminating cultural and religious traditions. Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak characterizes "group rape perpetrated by the conquerors" as "a metonymic celebration of territorial acquisition". Evidence provided by Cohen also suggests that some militaries that use child soldiers use rape as a maturation ritual to increase the tolerance of troops for violence, especially in patriarchal societies that equate masculinity with dominance and control. Some refugees and internally displaced people experience human trafficking for sexual or labour exploitation due to the breakdown of economies and policing in conflict regions.

In some conflicts, rape is used as a means of extracting information to force women and girls to give up the location of arms caches.

In discussing gang rape as a means of bonding among soldiers, Cohen discusses the viewpoint of " combatant socialization ", in which military groups use gang rape as a socialization tactic during armed conflict.

By using gang rape during armed conflict, militia group members: Prompt feelings of power and achievement Establish status and a reputation for aggressiveness Create an enhanced feeling of masculinity through bonding and bragging Demonstrate dedication to the group and a willingness to take risks While war rape may not be an apparent tool or weapon of war, it does serve as a primary tool to create a cohesive military group. Justification Some political and military leaders publicly suggested during the twenty-first century that wartime sexual violence is legitimate in the sense that it is humorous, insignificant in comparison to military deaths, or expected.

In January 2019, Ethiopian prime minister Abiy Ahmed stated, "So, if you're wondering what the proportion of Oromo in Tigray is, leave it for DNA to find out. It's probably wrong to say this, but: those who went to Adwa, to fight , didn't just go and come back. Each of them had about 10 kids. ." On 21 March 2021, during the Tigray War that started in early November 2020, Abiy suggested that sexual violence in the war was insignificant compared to military deaths, stating, "The women in Tigray? These women have only been penetrated by men, whereas our soldiers were penetrated by a knife." An unnamed Ethiopian general was quoted by physical geographer Jan Nyssen as stating during early 2021 that, in the context of the Tigray War, rape during wartime was "expected", but should not happen in the presence of federal police or administrative officials. Peace researcher Alex de Waal interpreted the comments by the prime minister as Abiy "jok about" gang rape. Gender Rape of women Susan Brownmiller was the first historian to attempt an overview of rape in war with documentation and theory. Brownmiller's thesis is that "War provides men with the perfect psychological backdrop to give vent to their contempt for women.

The maleness of the military—the brute power of weaponry exclusive to their hands, the spiritual bonding of men at arms, the manly discipline of orders given and orders obeyed, the simple logic of the hierarchical command—confirms for men what they long suspect—that women are peripheral to the world that counts." She writes that rape accompanies territorial advance by the winning side in land conflicts as one of the spoils of war, and that "Men who rape are ordinary Joes, made unordinary by entry into the most exclusive male-only club in the world." An estimated 45 million plus civilians died during World War II . Male and female civilians may be subject to torture , but many studies show that war rape is more frequently perpetrated on women than men. This may be due to the reluctance of men to come forward with accusations of being raped, and also an institutional bias amongst NGOs , who frequently focus resources on female victims.

However rape against women is also underreported. Perpetrators of sexual violence against women and children "commonly include not only enemy civilians and troops but also allied and national civilians and even comrades in arms." The victims of war rape are usually "civilians", a category first recognized in the 19th century.

Although war rape of women is documented throughout history, laws protecting civilians in armed conflict have tended not to recognize sexual assault on women. Even when laws of war have recognized and forbidden sexual assault, few prosecutions have been brought. According to Kelly Dawn Askin, the laws of war perpetuated the attitude that sexual assaults against women are less significant crimes, not worthy of prosecution. Until the early twenty-first century, war rape had been a hidden element of war. Human Rights Watch linked the hidden aspect to the largely gender-specific character of war rape – abuse committed by men against women. This gender-specific character has contributed to war rape being "narrowly portrayed as sexual or personal in nature, a portrayal that depoliticizes sexual abuse in conflict and results in its being ignored as a war crime ." "To the victor go the spoils" has been a war cry for centuries, and women classed as part of the spoils of war. Furthermore, war rape has been downplayed as an unfortunate but inevitable side effect of sending men to war. Also, war rape has in the past been regarded as a tangible reward to soldiers (who were paid irregularly), and as a soldier's proof of masculinity and success.

In reference to war rape in ancient times, Harold Washington argues that warfare itself is imaged as rape, and that the cities attacked are its victims. He argues that war rape occurs in the context of stereotypes about women and men, which are part of the basic belief that violent power belongs to men, and that women are its victims. Rape of men The rape of men by other men is also common in war. A 2009 study by Lara Stemple found that it had been documented in conflicts worldwide; for example, 76% of male political prisoners in 1980s El Salvador and 80% of concentration camp inmates in Sarajevo reported being raped or sexually tortured. Stemple concludes that the "lack of attention to sexual abuse of men during conflict is particularly troubling given the widespread reach of the problem". Mervyn Christian of Johns Hopkins School of Nursing has found that male rape is commonly underreported. According to a survey published in the Journal of the American Medical Association in 2010, 30% of women and 22% of men from the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo reported that they had been subject to conflict-related sexual violence. Despite the popular perception that rape during conflict is primarily targeted against women, these figures show that sexual violence committed against men is not a marginal occurrence.

The lack of awareness for the magnitude of the rape of men during conflict relates to chronic underreporting.

Although the physical and psychological repercussions from rape are similar for women and men, male victims tend to demonstrate an even greater reluctance to report their suffering to their families or the authorities. A 2011 story in The Guardian reports on war rape in Uganda: " is usually denied by the perpetrator and his victim. … Survivors are at risk of arrest by police, as they are likely to assume that they're gay – a crime in this country and in 38 of the 53 African nations. They will probably be ostracised by friends, rejected by family and turned away by the UN and the myriad international NGOs that are equipped, trained and ready to help women. … Often, says wives who discover their husbands have been raped decide to leave them. 'They ask me: "So now how am I going to live with him?

As what? Is this still a husband? Is it a wife?" They ask, "If he can be raped, who is protecting me?"'" Sexual violence against men weaponizes ideas of gender and sexuality against victims, causing tremendous physical and mental pain to victims. This weaponization can be especially damaging within conservative social environments in which homosexual intercourse – regardless of consent – is punished harshly. For example, some Ugandan male rape victims have not spoken out for fear of being branded as homosexual.

As homosexuality is widely condemned in Uganda , male victims of sexual violence often struggle to get proper support because they are accused of being gay.

In certain cases, gender roles concerning violence and sexual conduct are so deeply ingrained that the mere existence of male rape is denied.

In certain instances, women were taunted by soldiers with the threat of infection. Psychosocial workers with International Rescue Committee (IRC) help rape survivors in South Kivu DRC in 2010. War rape may include physical rape of the male organ. Gang rape and rape with human objects or physical objects, such as fists, sticks, rods, and gun barrels are also methods used in war rape. Women victims may suffer from incontinence and vaginal fistula as a result of these particularly violent forms of rape.

In extreme instances of violent rape in war, the walls of the vagina are torn or punctured, resulting in severe pain and debilitating incontinence (urinary complications) and bowel containment. Physical effects may also include bone breakage such as backbreaking and cranial cracks, causing future disability, visual and hearing impairment, and mental incapacitation. Psychological effects Victims and survivors of war rape are at very high risk of psychosocial problems.

The short-term psychological injuries to the victims include feelings of fear, helplessness, sadness , disorientation, isolation , vulnerability , and desperation . If left untreated, the psychological effects of sexual assault and rape can be devastating, sometimes even deadly. Causes of death as the result of sexual violence include suicide and murder. Murder of sexual assault and rape victims may be perpetrated by the rapist or as part of an honor killing by family members of the victim. Long-term psychological injuries may include depression , anxiety disorders, post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), multiple somatic symptoms, flashbacks , on-going trauma, chronic insomnia, self-hatred, nightmares, paranoia, difficulty re-establishing intimate relationships, shame, disgust, anger, and persistent fears. They could have trouble sleeping, experience changes in their appetite, or develop full-blown emotional problems, including posttraumatic stress disorder, depression, substance abuse, or dependence. Individuals who have experienced sexual assault are at risk for other day-to-day problems, including arguing with family members and having problems at work. Lack of medical psychological support resources also puts victims of war rape at further disadvantage. Refugee women are also at a disadvantage of receiving adequate assistance to deal with the psychological consequences of war rape – not only do they lack legal representation, they also may lack protection from the perpetrators of the violent act. Furthermore, there is an increase in dislike of refugees and asylum seekers which is another obstacle in the psychological healing process of victims seeking assistance outside of their countries that may still be under civil strife. Psychological support and counseling sessions given by individuals not part of the ethnic, linguistic, or community may incite difficulties in communication between patient and caregiver.

As a result, adequate emotional and psychological support to the victims is not fully developed, affecting the long-term healing potential for the patient. Psychosocial and societal effects A girl, raped during the war, in the Albergo dei Poveri reformatory, Naples , Italy, 1948.

In addition to the physical and psychological damages resulting from rape, sexual violence in the context of war often disrupt the linkages between the rape victims and their communities. Thus, the phenomenon of war rape can structurally affect entire societies, which is closely linked to the logic underlying the strategic use of rape as an instrument in armed conflicts. Raping 'enemy' women also constitutes an act of abuse and humiliation against the men of the community the victims were representative of. Research in 2019 suggests that wartime sexual violence may increase instances of intimate partner abuse in the affected society. A study on the aftermath of civil war in Peru estimated that in departments which had experienced conflict-related sexual violence, women in the department were at increased risk of intimate partner violence after the war. Besides the psychosocial effects on women as the most frequent victims of wartime rape, children born of rape are faced with distinct social stigmas.

The existence of taboos around the issue of war rape can also be an obstacle to post-conflict reconciliation. Stigmatization and isolation Psychosocial consequences of war rape describe how the linkages between victims and the society are altered as a result of sexual abuses during war. Both during and even more in the aftermath of conflict, when abuses become known, victims of war rape risk finding themselves in situations of social isolation, often abandoned by their husbands and rejected by their communities The ordeal is thus not over with the survival of the act of abuse but has a long-term effect that can only to a limited extent be dealt with by the victims themselves.

The process of re-victimization captures how victims of sexual violence continue to "receive additional hurt after the direct cause of victimization has disappeared" with stigmatization and exclusion being among the main sources of re-victimization. This is particularly relevant in patriarchal societies , where female sexuality is linked to male honour, virginity is a core value, and where a culture considers ethnicity transmitted through male genes. Given the ethnic dimension of sexuality, rape can become a means of ethnic cleansing or genocide , as has been claimed in relation to systematic instances of rape in Rwanda and Bosnia.

In this context, "rape as a weapon of war is not an individual issue, but a societal one." In a number of countries, the targeted infection of women with HIV, which creates further suffering for victims experiencing social exclusion and discrimination for having HIV/AIDS . Impact on children who are born as a result of rape War rape can have an equally strong and a long-lasting effect on children who are born as a result of it.

On the one hand, these children may not be immediately identified and as a result, they might not find out about their origins until they reach a later point in their lives.

In turn, if the children themselves but even more importantly, if the community knows about the 'war babies', they risk being regarded as the 'other' by the communities into which they were born. Recurring patterns in countries which include Bosnia and Herzegovina , Uganda , Sierra Leone and Rwanda show how children who were born as a result of war rape and the mothers who do not want them both have to face struggles with regard to issues which are related to their identities – both in an administrative and a personal sense – and their rights are sometimes restricted, such as their right to obtain an education and their right to be protected from discrimination and physical harm. Unwanted children who were born as a result of rape are potentially more vulnerable in both a psychological and a physical way and cases of child abandonment have been reported in various contemporary conflict and post-conflict societies. Impact on post-conflict reconciliation The societal consequences of war rape can equally have a negative impact on post-conflict reconciliation and the judicial follow-up on wartime crimes, including rape. Given the stigmatisation of victims and their isolation or fear thereof, they might prefer to remain silent with regard to the violations they have suffered. Indeed, underreporting of cases of rape during armed conflict is a practical challenge post-conflict communities have to face that is pointed to by a number of actors, including the United Nations Secretary-General , the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights as well as international NGOs .

As Human Rights Watch reported with regard to war rape during the Rwandan genocide , victims "expressed dismay at the fact that they were being urged to forget what happened to them in the name of peace and reconciliation".

The fear of consequences and threat of exclusion felt by the victims makes it difficult to establish clear figures of war rape incidents and to hold perpetrators accountable for the crimes they have committed, as has been claimed with regards to war rape in Darfur : "Underreporting of cases may be attributed to the stigma associated with rape, shame and fear of reprisal, denial that rape occurs, intimidation by many Government officials and the inability to access some conflict-affected areas". This points to another difficulty victims of war rape have to deal with at the societal level.

The perpetrators of rape are often officials or otherwise affiliated with the state's institutions, which might make reporting of assaults appear useless. Psychiatric care Disrupted healthcare sectors is a term the World Health Organization describes for medical facilities that are destroyed or partially destroyed in war torn areas. Health care facilities are essential for the establishment of support systems for rape victims. Psychological support units are also hampered by the lack of material resources available to the medical community on-ground. Medical practitioners and health-care workers face daunting challenges in conflict and post-conflict area.

As the WHO explains, "healthcare delivery fragments and deteriorates, memory and knowledge are eroded, and power disperses". : 7 War-torn societies in immediate post-conflict zones have broken medical infrastructure such as: destroyed or partially destroyed hospitals (or clinics); non-functioning hospitals; poor, scarce or inadequate medical supplies, lack of running water, and scarce or lack of electricity. Dismantling weapons from armed rebels and other groups are prioritized in immediate post-conflict situations which in effect de-prioritizes the immediate physical and psychiatric care that war rape victims are in urgent need of. "If we do not have the capacity to prevent war, we have a collective responsibility to better understand and treat its psychiatric, medical, and social consequences." Access to psychological health services further causes inequity for survivors of war rape who are at the margins of society living in chronic poverty or located in rural regions. Healthcare and psychiatric care is a key component to the healing processes of war rape. Impact Former Yugoslavia Main article: Yugoslav Wars Evidence of the magnitude of rape in Bosnia and Herzegovina prompted the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) to deal openly with these abuses.

The issue of rape during armed conflict was brought to the attention of the United Nations after the breakup of Yugoslavia in the early 1990s, in conjunction with the Bosnian war. Reports of sexual violence during the Bosnian War (1992–1995) and Kosovo War (1998–1999), part of the Yugoslav wars , a series of conflicts from 1991 to 1999, have been described as "especially alarming".

During the Kosovo War thousands of Kosovo Albanian women and girls became victims of sexual violence by Serbian paramilitaries, soldiers or policemen.

Following the entry of NATO in the Kosovo War, rapes of Serbian, Albanian, and Roma women were committed by ethnic Albanians . Rapes by members of the Kosovo Liberation Army have also been documented. It has been estimated that during the Bosnian War between 20,000 and 50,000 women were raped.

The majority of the rape victims were Muslim women raped by Serbian soldiers.

Although men also became victim of sexual violence, war rape was disproportionately directed against women who were (gang) raped in the streets, in their homes and/or in front of family members. Sexual violence occurred in multiple ways, including rape with objects, such as broken glass bottles, guns and truncheons. War rape occurred as a matter of official orders as part of ethnic cleansing, to displace the targeted ethnic group out of the region.

During the Bosnian War, the existence of deliberately created "rape camps" was reported.

The reported aim of these camps was to impregnate the Muslim and Croatian women held captive. It has been reported that often women were kept in confinement until the late stage of their pregnancy. This occurred in the context of a patrilineal society, in which children inherit their father's ethnicity, hence the "rape camps" aimed at the birth of a new generation of Serb children. According to the Women's Group Tresnjevka more than 35,000 women and children were held in such Serb-run "rape camps".

During the Kosovo War thousands of Kosovar Albanian women and girls became victims of sexual violence. War rape was used as a weapon of war and an instrument of systematic ethnic cleansing ; rape was used to terrorize the civilian population, extort money from families, and force people to flee their homes. According to a 2000 Human Rights Watch report war rape in the Kosovo War can generally be subdivided into three categories: rapes in women's homes, rapes during fighting, and rapes in detention.

The majority of the perpetrators were Serbian paramilitaries, but they also included Serbian special police or Yugoslav army soldiers. Most rapes were gang rapes involving at least two perpetrators. Rapes occurred frequently in the presence, and with the acquiescence, of military officers. Soldiers, police, and paramilitaries often raped their victims in the full view of numerous witnesses. Mass rape in the Bosnian War Main article: Rape in the Bosnian War During the Bosnian War , Bosnian Serb forces conducted a sexual abuse strategy against thousands of Bosnian Muslim girls and women which became known as a "mass rape phenomenon". No exact figures on how many women and children were systematically raped by the Serb forces in various camps were established, but estimates range from 20,000 to 50,000. Mass rape mostly occurred in eastern Bosnia (especially during the Foča and Višegrad massacres ), and in Grbavica during the Siege of Sarajevo . Numerous Bosnian Serb officers, soldiers and other participants were indicted or convicted of rape as a war crime by the ICTY and the Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The events inspired the Golden Bear winner at the 56th Berlin International Film Festival in 2006, called Grbavica . Rwandan genocide Main article: Rwandan Genocide During the Rwandan genocide, from April until July 1994, hundreds of thousands of women and girls were raped or became the victims of other forms of sexual violence.

Although no explicit written orders to commit rape and other acts of sexual violence have been found, evidence suggests that military leaders encouraged or ordered their men to rape the Tutsis , and they also condoned the acts which were already taking place, without making efforts to stop them. Compared to other conflicts, the sexual violence in Rwanda stands out in terms of the organised nature of the propaganda that contributed significantly to fuelling sexual violence against Tutsi women, the very public nature of the rapes and the level of brutality towards the women. Anne-Marie de Brouwer concludes that considering the massive scale and public nature of war rape during the Rwandan genocide , "it is difficult to imagine anybody in Rwanda who was not aware of the sexual violence taking place." In 1998, the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda made the landmark decision that the war rape during the Rwanda genocide was an element of the crime of genocide.

The Trial Chamber held that "sexual assault formed an integral part of the process of destroying the Tutsi ethnic group and that the rape was systematic and had been perpetrated against Tutsi women only, manifesting the specific intent required for those acts to constitute genocide." In his 1996 report, the United Nations Special Rapporteur on Rwanda, Rene Degni-Segui stated that "rape was the rule and its absence was the exception." The report also stated that "rape was systematic and was used as a "weapon" by the perpetrators of the massacres. This can be estimated from the number and nature of the victims as well as from the forms of rape." A 2000 report prepared by the Organisation of African Unity's International Panel of Eminent Personalities concluded that "we can be certain that almost all females who survived the genocide were direct victims of rape or other sexual violence, or were profoundly affected by it".

The Special Rapporteur on Rwanda estimated in his 1996 report that between 2,000 and 5,000 pregnancies resulted from war rape, and that between 250,000 and 500,000 Rwandese women and girls had been raped. Rwanda is a patriarchal society and children therefore take the ethnicity of the father, underlining the fact that war rape occurred in the context of genocide. Within the context of the Rwandan genocide, victims of sexual violence were predominantly attacked on the basis of their gender and ethnicity.

The victims were mostly Tutsi women and girls, of all ages, while men were only seldom the victims of war rape. Women were demonized in the anti-Tutsi propaganda prior to the 1994 genocide.

The December 1990 issue of the newspaper Kangura published the "Ten Commandments", four of which portrayed Tutsi women as tools of the Tutsi community, as sexual weapons that would be used by the Tutsi to weaken and ultimately to destroy the Hutu men. Gender based propaganda also included cartoons printed in newspapers that portrayed Tutsi women as sex objects . Examples of gender based hate propaganda used to incite war rape included statements by perpetrators such as "You Tutsi women think that you are too good for us" and "Let us see what a Tutsi woman tastes like". Victims of war rape during the Rwandan genocide also included Hutu women considered moderates, such as Hutu women married to Tutsi men and Hutu women politically affiliated with the Tutsi. War rape also occurred regardless of ethnicity or political affiliation, with young or beautiful women being targeted based on their gender only. Sexual violence against men occurred significantly less frequently, but it frequently included the mutilation of their genitals, which were often displayed in public.

The perpetrators of war rape during the Rwandan genocide were mainly members of the Hutu militia, the " Interahamwe ". Rapes were also committed by military personnel within the Rwandan Armed Forces (FAR), including the Presidential Guard, and civilians. Sexual violence against women and girls during the Rwandan genocide included: rape, gang rape, sexual slavery (either collectively or individually through "forced marriages"), rape with objects such as sticks and weapons often leading to the victim's death, sexual mutilation of, in particular, breasts, vaginas or buttocks, often during or following rape. Pregnant women were not spared from sexual violence and on many occasions victims were killed following rape. Many women were raped by men who knew they were HIV positive and it has been suggested that there were deliberate attempts to transmit the virus to Tutsi women and their families. War rape occurred all over the country and it was frequently perpetrated in plain view of others, at sites such as schools, churches, roadblocks, government buildings or in the bush. Some women were kept as personal slaves for years after the genocide, and they were eventually forced to move to neighbouring countries after the genocide along with their captors.

The long-term effects of war rape in Rwanda on its victims include social isolation (the social stigma attached to rape meant that some husbands left their wives who had become victims of war rape, or that the victims became unmarriageable), unwanted pregnancies and babies (some women resorted to self-induced abortions), sexually transmitted diseases , including syphilis , gonorrhoea and HIV/AIDS (access to anti-retroviral drugs remains limited).

The International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, established in 1994 after the Rwandan Genocide, has only brought three perpetrators before the Tribunal, with the first conviction in 1998. Sri Lankan Civil War Main articles: Sexual violence against Tamils in Sri Lanka and Indian Peace Keeping Force § Sexual violence During the Sri Lankan Civil War , multiple Human Rights Organizations reported cases of rape, violence and disappearance of women in the 1990s, claiming to be committed by security forces. Government officials, including the president, have denied the claims and agreed to co-operate with the investigations and prosecute whomever they find guilty.

The UN Special Rapporteur has reported that individual investigations and proceedings relating to these cases have commenced at the local magistrates courts. Some of the notable cases of murdered raped victims and the massacres associated with the rape incidents are Krishanti Kumaraswamy , Arumaithurai Tharmaletchumi , Ida Carmelitta , Ilayathambi Tharsini , Murugesapillai Koneswary , Premini Thanuskodi , Sarathambal , Kumarapuram massacre and Vankalai massacre . Philippines: Mindanao and Sulu Main article: Moro insurgency in the Philippines On 24 September 1974, in the Malisbong massacre , the Armed Forces of the Philippines slaughtered 1,766 Moro Muslim civilians who were praying at a Mosque in addition to mass raping Moro girls who had been taken aboard a boat. Bangladesh: Chittagong Hill Tracts Main articles: Persecution of indigenous peoples in Bangladesh and 2012 Ramu violence In the Chittagong Hill Tracts Bengali settlers and soldiers have raped native Jumma ( Chakma ) women "with impunity" with the Bangladeshi security forces doing little to protect the Jummas and instead assisting the rapists and settlers. Kashmir conflict Main article: Rape during the Kashmir conflict Numerous scholars and human rights agencies assert that since the onset of the insurgency in Jammu and Kashmir in 1988, rape has been leveraged as a 'weapon of war' by Indian security forces comprising the Indian Army , Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) and Border Security personnel . 21st century According to Amnesty International, documented cases of war rape in the early twenty-first century include incidents in Afghanistan , Chechnya , Colombia , Iraq, Sudan , and Nepal. UNICEF has documented widespread rape in conflict areas and war zones. Democratic Republic of the Congo Main articles: Rape during the Congo civil wars and Sexual violence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo South Kivu Province in the Democratic Republic of the Congo Democratic Republic of the Congo In Eastern Congo , the prevalence and intensity of rape and other sexual violence is described as the worst in the world. A 2010 study found that 22% of men and 30% of women in Eastern Congo reported conflict-related sexual violence.

Since fighting broke out in 1998 tens of thousands of people have been raped in the Democratic Republic of Congo . It is estimated that there are as many as 200,000 surviving rape victims living in the Democratic Republic of the Congo today. War rape in the Democratic Republic of Congo has frequently been described as a "weapon of war" by commentators. Louise Nzigire, a local social worker, states that "this violence was designed to exterminate the population." Nzigire observes that rape has been a "cheap, simple weapon for all parties in the war, more easily obtainable than bullets or bombs." The rape of men is also common. Men who admit they were raped risk ostracism by their community, and criminal prosecution, because they may be seen as homosexual, which is a crime in 38 African countries. Despite the peace process launched in 2003, sexual assault by soldiers from armed groups and the national army continues in the eastern provinces of the country. Evidence of war rape emerged when United Nations troops move into areas previously ravaged by war after the peace process started. Gang rape and rape with objects has been reported.

The victims of war rape may suffer from incontinence and vaginal fistula as a result of particularly violent rape. Witness accounts include an instance of a woman who had the barrel of a gun inserted into her vagina, after which the soldier opened fire. Incontinence and vaginal fistula leads to the isolation of war rape victims from her community and access to reconstructive surgery is limited in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. More than 500 rapes were reported in Eastern Congo in August 2010, leading to an apology from Atul Khare that the UN peacekeepers had failed to protect the population from brutalisation.

In late 2014, ISIL released a pamphlet on the treatment of female slaves.

The New York Times said in August 2015 that "he systematic rape of women and girls from the Yazidi religious minority has become deeply enmeshed in the organization and the radical theology of the Islamic State in the year since the group announced it was reviving slavery as an institution." 2011 Libyan civil war Main article: 2011 Libyan rape allegations The chief prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC), Luis Moreno Ocampo , claimed that there is evidence that Gaddafi 's troops used rape as a weapon during the Libyan civil war . He also said, "Apparently, he decided to punish, using rape," while witnesses confirmed that the Libyan government also purchased a large number of Viagra -like drugs.

The Libyan government, on the other hand, does not recognize the ICC's jurisdiction. Afghan Taliban In 2015, Amnesty International reported that the Afghan Taliban had engaged in mass murders and gang rapes of Afghan civilians in Kunduz . Taliban fighters killed and raped the female relatives of police commanders and soldiers.

The Taliban also raped and killed midwives who they accused of providing reproductive health services to women in the city. One female human rights activist described the situation: When the Taliban asserted their control over Kunduz, they claimed to be bringing law and order and Shari'a to the city. But everything they've done has violated both. I don't know who can rescue us from this situation. Rape in contemporary peace operations by UN peacekeepers In contemporary conflict zones, international organizations, particularly the United Nations peacekeepers, have been involved in maintaining peace and stability in the area as well as distribute humanitarian aid to the local population.

At present there are 16 Peace Operations directed by the UN Department of Peacekeeping Operations.

The peacekeepers are mainly composed of military personnel (but to a less number also the police) sent by governments of various member-states. However, over the course of their involvement in the field, peacekeepers have also been accused and at times found guilty of committing rape and other forms of sexual violence to the local population, in particular to women and children. Among all international staff in the conflict zone, United Nations peacekeepers (handled by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations) have been most frequently identified as the perpetrators of rape. Motivations for rape and sexual abuse by peacekeepers Like traditional military ventures, peacekeepers are deployed in highly unstable areas similar to war zones, where there is absence of the rule of law, disintegration of society and great psychological and economic hardships. Having an image of wealth and authority, peacekeepers can easily exercise power over the local population, which is often abused. Moreover, as members of their respective country's militaries, peacekeepers also carry with them in the peace operations the "hyper-masculine culture" that encourages sexual exploitation and abuse.

In the early twenty-first century, several UN soldiers in Haiti have been accused and convicted of raping boys as young as 14 years.

In one instance, Uruguayan UN soldiers were accused in 2011 of raping a Haitian boy, sparking protests that called for the withdrawal of UN peacekeeping forces.

In Congo in 2004, peacekeepers from Uruguay , Morocco , Tunisia , South Africa and Nepal have faced 68 cases of rape, prostitution and pedophilia .

The investigation resulted in the jailing of six Nepalese troops.

In Sudan, the Egyptian contingent was accused of raping six women when the civilians took shelter at the peacekeepers' headquarters in order to flee from the fighting. Allegations of rape of young women and children have also been launched against UN peacekeepers in South Sudan .

In Mali , four UN peacekeepers from Chad were involved in the rape of a woman. Members of the Moroccan contingent faced rape charges during the course of their duties at the UN mission in Ivory Coast . Punitive measures The most common challenge in reprimanding perpetrators is the significant underreporting of the issue mainly due to three reasons. First, the victims do not report or file complaints due to fears of revenge from the offender(s), denial of aid and the social stigma against rape victims in the victims' own community. Second, UN higher officials previously dismissed such allegations as "boys will be boys". Third, fellow peacekeepers are accustomed to the "wall of silence" in the spirit of brotherhood characteristic of military culture but also to protect the reputation of their sending government.

As a consequence, whistleblowers are often stigmatised. However, if there would indeed be reports, the UN instituted the Conduct and Discipline Teams (CDTs) to conduct an investigation referring the allegations for serious offense to the Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS).

When found guilty, the course of the specific disciplinary action is dependent on the employee status of the offender. UN civilian staff and personnel have functional immunity that can only be waived by the UN Secretary-General.

In the case of military personnel, they are subject to the jurisdiction of their respective sending governments.

The usual practice for offending soldiers has been to repatriate the personnel and prosecute them in their home country.

In several cases, punitive measures are imposed such as demotion or dishonorable dismissal. However, very few among guilty personnel have faced criminal charges in their home countries after repatriation. Myanmar In 2016–2017 and beyond, many Rohingya Muslim women were raped by Burmese soldiers during the Rohingya genocide . Mass rape has been a central weapon of war against the ethnic minorities by the Myanmar military. According to the 2018 report of the UN Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual violence, the mass rape of Rohingya girls and women were not a culmination of individual choices to rape nor an unfortunate by-product of war but a part of the Myanmar military policy strategically carried out to forcibly remove the Rohingya ethnic group. Tigray Main article: Sexual violence in the Tigray War In the Tigray War of 2020–2022 in the Tigray Region of Ethiopia , there were widespread reports of rape and other sexual abuse. Europe External Programme with Africa (EEPA) described an incident of six young girls raped in Mekelle in which the Ethiopian National Defense Force (ENDF) soldiers justified the rape on the grounds that "' father is Dr. Debretsion and ' is Dr. Abiy. We are not all the same", in reference to the two main political leaders of the conflict, Debretsion Gebremichael , the deposed leader of the Tigray Region, and Abiy Ahmed , the prime minister of Ethiopia. Weyni Abraha from Yikono , a Tigrayan women's rights group, viewed the sexual violence as a deliberate use of rape as a weapon of war, stating "This is being done purposely to break the morale of the people, threaten them and make them give up the fight." Arguments for sexual violence in the Tigray War constituting a deliberate campaign satisfying the definition of genocide include the well-organised command hierarchy of the ENDF as the largest contributor of armed forces to United Nations peacekeeping operations, the strict command hierarchy of the Eritrean Defence Forces (EDF) as the tool of a totalitarian state, testimonies about soldiers refusing to rape being punished, the systematic continuation of patterns of rape over six to seven months, and similarities with rape during the Bosnian War and during the Rwandan genocide . Rape camps A rape camp is a detention facility that is designed for or becomes a place where detainees are systematically and repeatedly raped, under the control and authority of state or non-state, armed or civilian, organisational structures. Late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries Bangladesh Genocide During the Bangladesh Liberation War , the Pakistani military used Army Camps as rape camps as a part of the genocide .

In These Times . Archived from the original on 18 May 2019 . Retrieved 30 April 2014 . ^ Haddad, Heidi Nichols (2011). "Mobilizing the Will to Prosecute: Crimes of Rape at the Yugoslav and Rwandan Tribunals" . Human Rights Review . 12 : 109– 132. doi : 10.1007/s12142-010-0163-x . S2CID 55172255 . ^ Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, Articles 7–8, 1998. ^ a b c d e f Nordås, Ragnhild; Cohen, Dara Kay (11 May 2021). "Conflict-Related Sexual Violence" . Annual Review of Political Science . 24 (1): 193– 211. doi : 10.1146/annurev-polisci-041719-102620 . ISSN 1094-2939 . S2CID 236571930 . ^ a b "War on Women – Time for action to end sexual violence in conflict" (PDF) . Nobel Women's Initiative. May 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 July 2018 . Retrieved 10 May 2015 . ^ a b "Elements of Crimes" . International Criminal Court . Archived from the original on 1 December 2008 . Retrieved 25 May 2017 . Archive copy at the Internet Archive PDF . ^ a b Minzoni – Deroche, Angela (November 2005). "Rape as a tactic of war – Advocacy Paper" (PDF) . Caritas France. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 January 2020 . Retrieved 29 July 2008 . ^ "Sexual Violence in Conflict: Our Mandate" . United Nations . Retrieved 26 November 2022 . ^ a b Askin (1997) , p. 17 ^ Nicolas Werth, Karel Bartošek, Jean-Louis Panné, Jean-Louis Margolin, Andrzej Paczkowski, Stéphane Courtois , The Black Book of Communism : Crimes, Terror, Repression , Harvard University Press , 1999, ISBN 0-674-07608-7 , page 5. ^ Askin (1997) , pp. 24–25 ^ a b Inal, Tuba (2013). Looting and Rape in Wartime: Law and Change in International Relations . United States: University of Pennsylvania Press. ^ a b Askin (1997) , pp. 26–27 ^ a b Askin (1997) , p. 27 ^ a b Askin (1997) , p. 28 ^ a b Askin (1997) , pp. 30–32 ^ Rietbergen, Peter (2006). Europe: A Cultural History (2nd ed.). Abingdon: Routledge. p. 216. ISBN 9780415323598 . ^ Askin (1997) , p. 34 ^ Askin (1997) , p. 33 ^ a b Askin (1997) , pp. 35–36 ^ de Brouwer (2005) , p. 5 ^ "Sexual Violence in the Holocaust: Perspectives from Ghettos and Camps in Ukraine" . Heinrich-Böll-Stiftung . Retrieved 30 March 2023 . ^ de Brouwer (2005) , pp. 5–7 ^ Herbermann, Nanda; Baer, Hester; Baer, Elizabeth Roberts (2000).

The Blessed Abyss: Inmate #6582 in Ravensbruck Concentration Camp for Women . Wayne State University Press. pp. 33– 34. ISBN 978-0-8143-2920-7 . ^ Gmyz, Cezary (2007). "Seksualne niewolnice III Rzeszy" (in Polish). Archived from the original on 13 May 2008. ^ Yudkin, Leon (1993). Hebrew Literature in the Wake of the Holocaust . Fairleigh Dickinson University Press. pp. 13– 32. ISBN 978-0-8386-3499-8 . ^ Lenten, Ronit (2000). Israel and the Daughters of the Shoah: Reoccupying the Territories of Silence . Berghahn Books. pp. 33– 34. ISBN 978-1-57181-775-4 . ^ a b c Simons, Marlise (June 1996). "For first time, Court Defines Rape as War Crime" .

The New York Times . ^ Rosenberg, Tine (April 1998). "Editorial Observer; New punishment for an ancient war crime" .

The New York Times . ^ a b c de Brouwer (2005) , p. 8 ^ Ash, Lucy (May 2015). "The rape of Berlin" . BBC News . Retrieved 5 November 2015 . ^ "Silence Broken on Red Army Rapes in Germany" . NPR . Retrieved 5 November 2015 . ^ "Disegnodilegge d'iniziativa dei senatori Magliocchetti e Bonatesta: Norme in favore delle vittime di violenze carnali in tempo di guerra" (PDF) (in Italian). Senate of Italy. 25 July 1996 . Retrieved 19 October 2019 . ^ International Military Tribunal (1949). Trials of War Criminals Before the Nuremberg Military Tribunals Under Control Council Law No. 10, Nuernberg, October 1946 – April 1949 . United States Government Printing Office . p. 79. ^ "The Practical Guide to Humanitarian Law: Protected Persons" . Doctors Without Borders . ^ a b c d e "Fourth annual report of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda" (PDF) . 19 October 1999. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 January 2014 . Retrieved 23 September 2014 . ^ a b Navanethem_Pillay is quoted by Professor Paul Walters in his presentation of her honorary doctorate of law, Rhodes_University , April 2005 Archived 26 September 2006 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Violence against women" (PDF) . 3 September 2010 . Retrieved 23 September 2014 . ^ a b "Rape as a Crime Against Humanity" . Archived from the original on 27 November 2007. ^ a b "Bosnia-Herzegovina : Foca verdict – rape and sexual enslavement are crimes against humanity" . Archived 7 September 2009 at the Wayback Machine . 22 February 2001. Amnesty International . ^ a b c "UN Security Council Takes a Historic Stand Supporting Abortion Access for Women Raped in War / Library / Homepage" . AWID. Archived from the original on 3 December 2013 . Retrieved 2 December 2013 . ^ As quoted by Guy Horton in Dying Alive – A Legal Assessment of Human Rights Violations in Burma April 2005, co-Funded by The Netherlands Ministry for Development Co-Operation. See section "12.52 Crimes against humanity", Page 201. He references RSICC/C, Vol. 1 p. 360 ^ "Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court" . United Nations . Retrieved 30 April 2014 . ^ "Security Council demands immediate and complete halt to acts of sexual violence against civilians in conflict zones, unanimously adopting Resolution 1820 (2008)" . United Nations . Retrieved 9 November 2012 . ^ osrsgsvc. "About the Office – United Nations Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict" . Retrieved 23 February 2025 . ^ "About the Office" . United Nations Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict . Retrieved 6 September 2016 . ^ "2.12.1. Violence against women and girls: overview" . European Union Agency for Asylum . Retrieved 23 November 2023 . ^ "The Worst Place on Earth to be a Woman: Violence against Yemeni Women in Peace and War" . Rivera Publications.l . Retrieved 23 November 2023 . ^ "Gender-Based Violence continues to surge in eastern DRC - Democratic Republic of the Congo" . ReliefWeb . 8 September 2023 . Retrieved 23 November 2023 . ^ a b "The prosecution at national level of sexual and gender-based violence (SGBV) committed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)" (PDF) . European Union Agency for Criminal Justice Cooperation . July 2017. ^ "Israel Gaza: Hamas raped and mutilated women on 7 October, BBC hears" . BBC News . 5 December 2023 . Retrieved 8 January 2024 . ^ "The battle to highlight crimes against women in Hamas' attack on Israel" . CTech . 22 November 2023 . Retrieved 23 November 2023 . ^ Ben Canaan, Ron; Ziv, Hadas (26 November 2023). Grossman, Lital; Shalev, Guy (eds.). "Sexual & Gender-Based Violence as a Weapon of War During the October 7, 2023 Hamas Attacks" (PDF) . Physicians for Human Rights–Israel . Proofreading: Nili Alexandrovitz. Background research: Timor Tal. Cover photo: Oren Ziv. Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 November 2023 . Retrieved 4 December 2023 . ^ "Gender-Based Violence as a Weapon of War during the October 7 Hamas Attacks" . www.phr.org.il . 26 November 2023. ^ "Islamic Jihad terrorist admits to rape, NYT probes Hamas sexual violence" .

The Jerusalem Post . 29 December 2023 . Retrieved 8 January 2024 . ^ Robertson, Nick (19 February 2024). "UN experts condemn 'credible' reports of executions, sexual assault by Israeli soldiers" .

The Hill . ^ "Israeli soldiers have been sexually assaulting Palestinian women for decades. Now they're speaking out" . ^ Graham-Harrison, Emma; Taha, Sufian; McKernan, Bethan; Kierszenbaum, Quique (5 August 2024). "Torture, abuse and humiliation: Palestinians on Israeli prison 'hell' " .

The Guardian . ^ "UN experts appalled by reported human rights violations against Palestinian women and girls" . United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights . 19 February 2024 . Retrieved 6 April 2024 . ^ Levinson, Bernard M. (2004). Gender and Law in the Hebrew Bible and the Ancient Near East . A&C Black. p. 203. ISBN 978-0-567-08098-1 . ^ Lerner, Gerda (1987).

The Creation of Patriarchy (paperback ed.). Oxford University Press. p. 80. ISBN 0-19-505185-8 . ^ Clancier, Philippe (10 April 2015). "Warlike men and invisible women: how scribes in the Ancient Near East represented warfare" . Clio. Women, Gender, History (39). doi : 10.4000/cliowgh.440 . ISSN 2554-3822 . ^ "Feminization of Captives" . ^ "What Happened To The Woman In Deuteronomy 21:10-14?" . Discover The Truth . 19 January 2017 . Retrieved 28 January 2026 . ^ Gaca, Kathy L. (2011). Heineman, Elizabeth D. (ed.). Sexual Violence in Conflict Zones: From the Ancient World to the Era of Human Rights . University of Pennsylvania Press. p. 78. ^ Gaca, Kathy L. (2016). Paludi, Michele A. (ed.). Feminism and Religion: How Faiths View Women and Their Rights . Praeger. pp. 179– 180, 183– 184. ISBN 978-1440838880 . ^ Vikman, Elisabeth (April 2005). "Ancient origins: Sexual violence in warfare, Part I". Anthropology & Medicine . 12 (1): 21– 31. doi : 10.1080/13648470500049826 . PMID 28135871 . S2CID 30831085 . ^ Madenholm, Terry (30 August 2022). "Rape as an Ancient Weapon of War" . Haaretz . Archived from the original on 31 August 2022 . Retrieved 5 December 2023 . ^ Van Broeck, Leen (20 December 2017). "People, Place, and Power in Tacitus' Germany: Thesis submitted for the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy in Classics, 6 December 2-Royal Holloway, University of London" (PDF) . pure.royalholloway.ac.uk . pp. 117– 118 . Retrieved 6 December 2023 . ^ Dixon, Jessica E. (2012). "The Language of Roman Adultery: a Thesis Submitted to The University of Manchester for the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy" (PDF) . pure.manchester.ac.uk . p. 121 . Retrieved 6 December 2023 . ^ Curta, Florin (1996). "Slavs In Fredregar: Medieval 'Gens' or Narrative Strategy?" (PDF) . Acta Universitatis Szegediensis: Acta Historica . 103 : 10. According to Fredegar, the Wends emerged from a peculiar union of Avar warriors and Slavic women: Every year, the Huns wintered with the Slavs, sleeping with their wives and daughters, and in addition the Slavs paid tribute and endured many other burdens.

The sons born to the Huns by the Slavs' wives and daughters ( filii Chunonini quos in uxores Winedorum et filias generauerant ) eventually found this shameful oppression intolerable; and so, as I said, they refused to obey their lords and started to rise in rebellion. It has long been noted that this text strikingly resembles the story of the Dulebians in the Russian Primary Chronicle. Nestor, the author of this twelfth-century chronicle, describes a similar behavior of the Avars: The Avars ... did violence to the Dulebian women.

When an Avar made a journey, he did not cause either a horse or a steer to be harnessed, but gave command instead that three of four or five women should be yoked to his cart and be made to draw him....

The role that Slavic women harassed by Avar warriors play in both stories may suggest that they both emerged from the same tradition.... There are however important differences between Nestor's and Fredegar's versions, which may indicate that they had access to different stages in the development of the story. Whatever the case, it is clear that Fredegar used here a Slavic tradition, though in a rationalized form. ^ Smitha, Frank. India, Empire, and Chaos . ^ Indian civilization . Deepak Shinde. 25 October 2016. ^ Roesdahl, pp. 9–22. ^ McEvoy, B.; Edwards, C. J. (1 June 2005). "Heredity – Human migration: Reappraising the Viking Image". Heredity . 95 (2): 111– 112. doi : 10.1038/sj.hdy.6800695 . PMID 15931243 . S2CID 6564086 . ^ Coupland, Simon (1 April 2003). "IngentaConnect The Vikings on the Continent in Myth and History" . History . 88 (2). Ingentaconnect.com: 186– 203. doi : 10.1111/1468-229X.00258 . ^ "Islam and slavery: Sexual slavery" . BBC . Retrieved 30 April 2014 . ^ "Horrible Traffic in Circassian Women—Infanticide in Turkey" . New York Daily Times , 6 August 1856. ^ Malcolm Cameron Lyons, D. E. P. Jackson (1984). Saladin: The Politics of the Holy War . Cambridge University Press . p. 277. ISBN 9780521317399 . ^ Gabrieli, Francesco (1969). Arab Historians of the Crusades. University of California Press. pp 162-163 ^ Tillman, Hoyt Cleveland (1995). Tillman, Hoyt Cleveland; West, Stephen H. (eds.). China Under Jurchen Rule: Essays on Chin Intellectual and Cultural History (illustrated ed.). SUNY Press. p. 27. ISBN 0-7914-2273-9 . ^ Ebrey, Patricia Buckley (2014). Emperor Huizong (illustrated, reprint ed.). Harvard University Press. p. 468. ISBN 978-0-674-72642-0 . ^ Man, John. Genghis Khan: Life, Death and Resurrection (London; New York: Bantam Press, 2004) ISBN 0-593-05044-4 . ^ Andrea, Alfred J. (March 2020). Medieval Record: Sources of Medieval History . Hackett Publishing. p. 339. ISBN 978-1624668708 . ^ "Accounts of the Mongols in the Medieval Record" . 8 June 2020. ^ Paris, Mathew (1200–1299). Cambridge, Corpus Christi College, MS 016II: Matthew Paris OSB, Chronica maiora II (in Latin and Middle French). ^ Sardelić, Mirko (30 December 2011). "Europski klerici i misionari o Mongolima: percepcija stepskih barbara u Europi sredinom 13. stoljeća" . Zbornik Odsjeka za povijesne znanosti Zavoda za povijesne i društvene znanosti Hrvatske akademije znanosti i umjetnosti (in Croatian). 29 : 1– 21. ISSN 1330-7134 . ^ "Escaping the Mongols: A Survivor's Account from the 13th century" . Medievalists.net . January 2018. ^ Bak, János M.; Rady, Martyn; Veszprémy, László, eds. (2010). Master Roger's Epistle to the Sorrowful Lament upon the Destruction of the Kingdom of Hungary by the Tatars (Bilingual ed.). Central European University Press. ISBN 978-9639776951 . ^ Murray, G. W. (1935). Sons Of Ishmael: A Study of the Egyptian Bedouin . London: George Routledge & Sons, ltd. p. 29. ^ Muir, Sir William (1896).

The Mameluke . Smith, Elder & Company. p. 57. ^ Yosef, Koby; Conermann, Stephan (17 June 2019). "Cross-Boundary Hatred: (Changing) Attitudes towards Mongol and 'Christian' mamlūks in the Mamluk Sultanate" .

In Amitai, Reuven; Conermann, Stephan (eds.).

The Mamluk Sultanate from the Perspective of Regional and World History: Economic, Social and Cultural Development in an Era of Increasing International Interaction and Competition . Mamluk Studies. Vol. 17. Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht. p. 173. ISBN 978-3-8470-0411-0 . ^ Burns, Ross (25 August 2016). Aleppo: A History . Cities of the Ancient World. Taylor & Francis. p. 189. ISBN 978-1-134-84401-2 . ^ Frey, Rebecca Joyce (2009). Genocide and International Justice . Global Issues – Facts On File. Infobase Publishing. p. 188. ISBN 978-0-8160-7310-8 . Alternative URL ^ "The Invasion of Syria by Tamerlane" . De Re Militari: The Society for Medieval Military History . Retrieved 5 October 2021 . ^ Al-Abboud, D. "The Question of Islamophobia and Marlowe's Tamburlaine the Great" . American University of Cairo . Archived from the original on 29 January 2019 . Retrieved 5 October 2021 . ^ جدلية, Jadaliyya-. "Tamerlane in Damascus" . Jadaliyya - جدلية . Retrieved 5 October 2021 . ^ Jones, J.R. Melville (red.), The siege of Constantinople 1453: seven contemporary accounts, Hakkert, Amsterdam, 1972, Ducus, 98-99 ^ Runciman, Steven, The fall of Constantinople 1453, Canto ed., Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1990 p. 147 ^ Fisher, Alan (2010). "The Sale of Slaves in the Ottoman Empire: Markets and State Taxes on Slave Sales, Some Preliminary Considerations". A Precarious Balance . Piscataway, NJ: Gorgias Press. p. 151. ^ Erdem, Y. Hakan. Slavery in the Ottoman Empire and its Demise, 1800–1909. London: Macmillan Press, 1996. ^ Guerdan, Rene ́, Byzantium: its triumphs and tragedy, Allen & Unwin, 1956 p. 219-220 ^ Calian, Florin George (25 March 2021). "The Hagia Sophia and Turkey's Neo-Ottomanism" .

The Armenian Weekly . Archived from the original on 5 November 2021 . Retrieved 5 November 2021 . ^ Schimmer, Karl August (1879).

The sieges of Vienna by the Turks. London : J. Murray. Contributor University of California Libraries. p. 21 ^ Schimmer, Karl August (1879).

The sieges of Vienna by the Turks. London : J. Murray. Contributor University of California Libraries. p. 52-53 ^ Peirce, Leslie (2021). A Spectrum of Unfreedom: Captives and Slaves in the Ottoman Empire . Central European University Press. doi : 10.7829/j.ctv1c3pdg0 . ISBN 978-963-386-399-2 . JSTOR 10.7829/j.ctv1c3pdg0 . ^ Reyna Pastor (2 June 2000). "Mujeres en España y en Hispanoamérica". Historia de las mujeres, tomo III, Del Renacimiento a la Edad Moderna, Georges Duby, page 555 . Madrid: Santillana. ISBN 84-306-0390-5 . ^ Stark, Christine. "Colonization, Homelessness, and the Prostitution and Sex Trafficking of Native Women" (PDF) . ^ Nagler, Pamela (10 June 2021). "Rape & the Conquest" .

The Pomonan Magazine . Retrieved 17 February 2026 . ^ "The Violent Legacies of the California Missions: Mapping the Origins of Native Women's Mass Incarceration" (PDF) . ^ "A prelude to the wars of religion:The sack of Rome (1527)" . ^ "The Sack of Rome 1527" . Braggoscope . 22 February 2024 . Retrieved 4 September 2024 . ^ Runa Hellinga (27 September 2019). "Die eeuw van goud ging aan Brabant en Limburg voorbij" . Trouw (in Dutch) . Retrieved 15 July 2022 . ^ Kautsky, Karl (1897). "Communism in Central Europe at the Time of the Reformation: The Fall of Münster" . Marxist Internet Archive . Retrieved 20 October 2023 . ^ Wilson, Peter H. (2009).

The Thirty Years War: Europe's tragedy . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-03634-5 . OCLC 316233555 . ^ Helfferich, Tryntje (2009).

The Thirty Years' War: a documentary history . Indianapolis: Hackett. ISBN 978-0-87220-940-4 . OCLC 262429332 . ^ Hastings, Max Montrose: The King's Champion (Gollancz, 1977) ISBN 0-575-02226-4 ^ Lang, Andrew The History of Scotland: Volume 3 , p.137 ^ Yi, Pae-yong (2008). Chan, Ted (ed.). Women in Korean History 한국 역사 속의 여성들 . Ewha Womans University Press. p. 114. ISBN 978-89-7300-772-1 . ^ Millward, James A. (1998). Beyond the Pass: Economy, Ethnicity, and Empire in Qing Central Asia, 1759–1864 . Stanford University Press. p. 124. ISBN 0-8047-9792-7 . ^ Newby, L. J. (2005).

The Empire And the Khanate: A Political History of Qing Relations With Khoqand C1760-1860 (illustrated ed.). BRILL. p. 39. ISBN 90-04-14550-8 . ^ Wang, Ke (2017). "Between the 'Ummah' and 'China'：The Qing Dynasty's Rule over Xinjiang Uyghur Society" (PDF) . Journal of Intercultural Studies . 48 . Kobe University: 204. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 June 2019 . Retrieved 1 June 2019 . ^ Millward, James A. (2007). Eurasian Crossroads: A History of Xinjiang (illustrated ed.). Columbia University Press. p. 108. ISBN 978-0-231-13924-3 . ^ Millward, James A. (2007). Eurasian Crossroads: A History of Xinjiang (illustrated ed.). Columbia University Press. p. 109. ISBN 978-0-231-13924-3 . ^ Millward, James A. (1998). Beyond the Pass: Economy, Ethnicity, and Empire in Qing Central Asia, 1759–1864 . Stanford University Press. pp. 206– 207. ISBN 0-8047-9792-7 . ^ 趙, 翼. " 簷曝雜記/卷一#黑水營之圍 ". 簷曝雜記 . Vol. 卷一. 黑水營之圍，孤軍陷萬里外，凡三月得全師以出，誠千古未有之奇事也。將軍兆惠既深入葉爾羌，賊眾我寡，且馬力疲不能衝殺，乃佔一村寨，掘濠築壘自守，即所謂黑水營也。所掘濠既淺，壘亦甚低，賊可步屧入，遂日夜來攻，而我兵處危地，皆死中求生，故殺賊甚力。賊懼我兵致死，欲以不戰收全功，别築一壘於濠外，爲長圍守之，如梁唐所謂夾城者，意我兵食盡，當自斃也。而營中掘得窖粟數百石，稍賴以濟。賊又決水灌營，我兵泄之於下流，其水轉資我汲飲。已而，隨處掘井皆得水。又所占地林木甚多，薪以供爨常不乏。賊以鳥槍擊我，其鉛子著枝葉間，每砍一樹輒得數升，反用以擊賊。惟拒守既久，粮日乏，僅瘦駝羸馬亦將盡。各兵每乘間出掠回人充食。或有夫婦同掠至者。殺其夫，即令妻煮之，夜則薦枕席。明日夫肉盡，又殺此婦以食。被殺者皆默然無聲，聽烹割而已。某公性最嗇，會除夕，明公瑞、常公鈞等皆至其帳聚語，屈指軍粮，過十日皆鬼籙矣。某公慨然謂：『吾出肅州時有送酒肴者，所餘餖飣，今尚貯皮袋中。』呼奴取出，供一啖。時絕粮久，皆大喜過望。既飽而去，則私相渭曰：『某公亦不留此，事可知矣。』不覺泣下，蓋自十月初旬被圍，至此已將百日，無復生還望也。而上已預調兵在途，富將軍、舒參贊率以進援，果毅阿公又以駝馬至，遂轉戰而入。兆將軍亦破壘而出，兩軍相遇，乃振旅歸。是役也，地在萬里之遙，圍及百日之久，不傷一人，全師而返，國家如天之福，於此可見。然向非預調索倫兵在途，將緩不及事，於此益見睿算之遠到云。其年遂盡平回地。 ^ 爱新觉罗, Zhaolian 昭槤. " 嘯亭雜錄/卷六#平定回部本末 ". 嘯亭雜錄 . Vol. 卷六. 兆文毅至軍，庫車已降於雅將軍，阿克蘇亦遣人迎降。八月二十四日，兆文毅遇雅將軍偕入，傳旨斬順德訥，即前守卡縱霍集占遁去者也。逮雅將軍送京，擇城中伯克鄂對隨軍，而留哈密回目玉素富及總兵閻師相率駐兵守。時舒文襄方為兵，效力軍前，亦令留阿克蘇讚畫諸務。兆文毅即起程，有烏什城伯克霍集斯者，即前縛送達瓦齊者，遣其子呼岱巴爾氐來迎。九月朔，兆文毅至烏什，以霍集斯熟回部事，與同進葉爾羌，分遣侍衛齊淩紮布偕鄂對往撫和闐六城。十月，兆文毅至葉爾羌。其城周十餘里，霍集占已堅壁清野，凡村莊人戶悉移入。初六日，我軍分七隊進，賊兩門各出四五百騎來迎，我兵擊敗之。賊又從北門出數百騎，索倫兵然遁，賴健銳營兵數百岸然不動，我兵得以濟，又敗賊眾，賊入城不復出。兆文毅以兵少不能圍城，欲伺便取勝，乃擇有水草處結營，即所謂黑水營也。聞納、三二將軍將至，遣愛隆阿以兵八百迎之。又偵知賊蓄在城南棋盤山，欲先取之以充軍實。十三日，由城南奪橋過河，甫過四百餘兵，橋忽斷，賊出四五千騎來截，步賊萬餘在後。我兵陣而前，騎賊退，步賊以鳥槍進，我兵方擊步賊，而騎賊又從後夾攻，兼有自兩翼衝入者。兆文毅馬中槍斃，再易馬又斃，我兵為賊所截，散落成數處，人皆自為戰，無不以死自誓，殺賊無算。而我兵陣亡者亦數百人，受傷者無算，總兵高天喜、副都統三保、護軍統領鄂實、監察御史何泰、侍衛特通額俱戰歿。日暮收兵歸，護大營過河者，亦泅水歸，馬力疲乏，不能衝殺，遂掘壕結寨守。所掘壕既淺，壘亦甚低，賊可步屟入，遂日夜來攻。我兵處危地，皆死中求生，故殺賊甚力。賊懼我兵致死，欲以不戰收全功，別築一壘於壕外，為長圍守之，如梁、宋所謂夾城者。意我兵食盡當自斃也，而營中掘得窖粟數百石，稍賴以濟。賊又決水灌營，我兵泄之於下遊，其水轉資我汲飲，已而隨處掘井皆得水。又所占地林木甚多，薪以供爨，常不乏。賊以鳥槍擊我，其鉛子著樹枝葉間，每砍一樹，輒得數升，反用以擊賊，惟拒守日久，糧日乏，僅瘦駝羸馬亦將盡，各兵每乘間出掠回人充食。或有夫婦同擄至者，殺其夫，即令其妻煮之，夜則薦枕席。明日夫肉盡，又殺此婦以食，被殺者皆默然無聲，聽烹割而已。某公性最嗇，會除夕，明忠烈公瑞、常中丞鈞皆至其帳聚語，屈指軍糧，過十日皆鬼籙矣。某公慨然謂：「吾出肅州時，有送酒餚者，所餘餖飣今尚貯皮袋中，呼奴取出供一啖。」時絕糧久，皆大喜過望，既飽而去，則私謂曰：「某公亦不留此，事可知矣！」不覺泣下。蓋自十月中旬被圍，已將百日，無復生還望也。納義烈公木劄爾、三公泰亦以十三日至愛隆阿軍，聞兆文毅等戰，率二百騎衝入，為賊所殺。 ^ Blussé & Everts (2000) . ^ Everts (2000) , pp. 151–155. ^ Andrade 2008b . ^ John Robert Shepherd (1993). Statecraft and Political Economy on the Taiwan Frontier, 1600–1800 . Stanford University Press. p. 59. ISBN 978-0-8047-2066-3 . ^ Lach, Donald F.; Van Kley, Edwin J. (1998). Asia in the Making of Europe, Volume III: A Century of Advance. Book 4: East Asia (revised ed.). University of Chicago Press. p. 1823. ISBN 978-0-226-46769-6 . ^ Manthorpe 2008 , p. 72 ^ a b Manthorpe, Jonathan (2008). Forbidden Nation: A History of Taiwan (illustrated ed.). Macmillan. p. 77. ISBN 978-0-230-61424-6 . ^ Covell, Ralph R. (1998). Pentecost of the Hills in Taiwan: The Christian Faith Among the Original Inhabitants (illustrated ed.). Hope Publishing House. p. 96. ISBN 978-0-932727-90-9 . ^ Heaver, Stuart (26 February 2012). "Idol worship" . South China Morning Post . p. 25. Archived from the original on 29 December 2014. Alternative URL Archived 20 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine ^ Moffett, Samuel H. (1998). A History of Christianity in Asia: 1500–1900 . Bishop Henry McNeal Turner Studies in North American Black Religion Series. Vol. 2 (2nd, illustrated, reprint ed.). Orbis Books. p. 222. ISBN 978-1-57075-450-0 . ^ Moffett, Samuel H. (2005). A history of Christianity in Asia, Volume 2 (2nd ed.). Orbis Books. p. 222. ISBN 978-1-57075-450-0 . ^ Free China Review, Volume 11 . W. Y. Tsao. 1961. p. 54. ^ Wright, Arnold, ed. (1909). Twentieth century impressions of Netherlands India: Its history, people, commerce, industries and resources (illustrated ed.). Lloyd's Greater Britain Pub. Co. p. 67. ^ Newman, Bernard (1961). Far Eastern Journey: Across India and Pakistan to Formosa . H. Jenkins. p. 169. ^ Muller, Hendrik Pieter Nicolaas (1917). Onze vaderen in China (in Dutch). P. N. van Kampen. p. 337. ^ Potgieter, Everhardus Johannes; Buys, Johan Theodoor; van Hall, Jakob Nikolaas; Muller, Pieter Nicolaas; Quack, Hendrik Peter Godfried (1917). De Gids, Volume 81, Part 1 (in Dutch). G. J. A. Beijerinck. p. 337. ^ Zeeuw, P. de (1924). De Hollanders op Formosa, 1624–1662: een bladzijde uit onze kolonialeen zendingsgeschiedenis (in Dutch). W. Kirchner. p. 50. ^ Algemeene konst – en letterbode (in Dutch). Vol. 2. A. Loosjes. 1851. p. 120. ^ Ernie (1 June 2012). "Koxinga the Pirate" . China Expat . ^ Nomsz, Joannes (1775). "Antonius Hambroek, of de Belegering van Formoza" . Universiteit Leiden . Amsteldam: Izaak Duim, op den Cingel, tusschen de Warmoesgracht, en de Drie-Koningstraat. ^ Andrade, Tonio (2011). Lost Colony: The Untold Story of China's First Great Victory Over the West . Princeton University Press. p. 413. ISBN 978-0-691-14455-9 . ^ Ziegler, Dominic (2016). Black Dragon River: A Journey Down the Amur River Between Russia and China (illustrated, reprint ed.). Penguin. p. 187. ISBN 978-0-14-310989-1 . ^ Widmer, Eric D. (1976).

The Russian Ecclesiastical Mission in Peking During the Eighteenth Century . Harvard East Asian monographs. Vol. 69 (illustrated ed.). Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Asia Center. p. 188. ISBN 0-674-78129-5 . ISSN 0073-0483 . ^ Aldrich, M. A. (2008).

The Search for a Vanishing Beijing: A Guide to China's Capital Through the Ages (illustrated, reprint ed.). Hong Kong University Press. p. 177. ISBN 978-962-209-777-3 . ^ Baddeley, John Frederick (1919). Baddeley, John Frederick (ed.). Russia, Mongolia, China: Being Some Record of the Relations Between Them from the Beginning of the XVIIth Century to the Death of the Tsar Alexei Mikhailovich, A.D. 1602–1676 . Burt Franklin research & source works series. Vol. 2. Macmillan. p. 431. ^ Standaert, N. (2001). Standaert, Nicolas; Tiedemann, R. G. (eds.). Handbook of Christianity in China, Part 1 . Handbook of Oriental Studies. Vol. 15 (illustrated ed.). Brill. p. 368. ISBN 90-04-11431-9 . ^ Widmer, Eric D. (1976).

The Russian Ecclesiastical Mission in Peking During the Eighteenth Century . Harvard East Asian monographs. Vol. 69 (illustrated ed.). Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Asia Center. p. 188. ISBN 0-674-78129-5 . ISSN 0073-0483 . ^ Snidal, Michelle (2019). "Rape in Revolutionary America, 1760-1815" . dspace.library.uvic.ca . p. 42 . Retrieved 20 January 2025 . ^ Heineman 2011 , p. 26. ^ Heineman 2011 , p. 27. ^ Heineman 2011 , p. 35. ^ a b Roger Van Aerde, "De Brabantse Omwenteling - De gevechten te Gent" (pdf), in: Gendtsche Tydinghen , 1985, no. 3, pp. 124–143. ^ Abd al-Rahman al-Jabarti . Tārīkh 'Ajā'ib al-Āthār (in Arabic). p. 3/606. ^ al-Fahd, Nasir (1993).

The Uthmani State and the Standpoint of the Dawah of Shaykh Muhammad ibn Abdul-Wahhab Concerning It . Archived from the original on 28 August 2008. ^ Haxthausen, Baron Von (2013).

The Russian Empire: Its People, Institutions and Resources (reprint ed.). Routledge. ISBN 978-1-134-56982-3 . ^ Richmond, Walter (2013).

The Circassian Genocide . Genocide, Political Violence, Human Rights. Rutgers University Press. p. 107. ISBN 978-0-8135-6069-4 . ^ Reid, James J. (2000). Crisis of the Ottoman Empire: Prelude to Collapse 1839–1878 . Quellen und Studien zur Geschichte des östlichen Europa. Vol. 57 (illustrated ed.). Franz Steiner. p. 148. ISBN 3-515-07687-5 . ISSN 0170-3595 . ^ Beckman (2003) , pp. 31–33 ^ a b Beckman (2003) , pp. 33–34 ^ Ball, Charles (1858).

The History of the Indian Mutiny . London Printing and Publishing Company. ^ Redfern (1858). Justice for India . ^ Gittings, John (5 August 2000). "Lost souls" .

The Guardian . ^ Mathisen, Robert R. (2006). Critical issues in American religious history . Baylor University Press. p. 539. ISBN 978-1-932792-39-3 . ^ a b c Preston, Diana (2000).

The boxer rebellion: the dramatic story of China's war on foreigners that shook the world in the summer of 1900 . Bloomsbury Publishing USA. p. 285. ISBN 978-0-8027-1361-2 . ^ Ransmeier, Johanna S. (2017). Sold People: Traffickers and Family Life in North China (illustrated ed.). Harvard University Press. p. 91. ISBN 978-0674971974 . ^ Rhoads, Edward J. M. (2017). Manchus and Han: Ethnic Relations and Political Power in Late Qing and Early Republican China, 1861-1928 . Studies on Ethnic Groups in China. University of Washington Press. p. 38. ISBN 978-0-295-99748-3 . ^ Fu, Chonglan; Cao, Wenming (2019). An Urban History of China . China Connections: Springer. p. 83. ISBN 978-9811382116 . ^ Sawara Tokusuke, "Miscellaneous Notes about the Boxers" (Quanshi zaji), in Compiled Materials on the Boxers (Yihetuan wenxian huibian), ed. Zhongguo shixue hui (Taipei: Dingwen, 1973), 1: 266–268. ^ Chao-ying Fang. "Chongqi".

In Eminent Chinese of the Qing Period (1644-1911/2) , 74–75. Great Barrington, Massachusetts: Berkshire, 2018. ^ Crossley, Pamela Kyle (2021). Orphan Warriors: Three Manchu Generations and the End of the Qing World . Princeton University Press. p. 174. ISBN 978-0-691-22498-5 . ^ Rhoads, Edward J. M. (2017). Manchus and Han: Ethnic Relations and Political Power in Late Qing and Early Republican China, 1861–1928 . Studies on Ethnic Groups in China. University of Washington Press. p. 80. ISBN 978-0295997483 . ^ Joanna Waley-Cohen (2000).

The Sextants of Beijing: Global Currents in Chinese History . W. W. Norton & Company. p. 201. ISBN 978-0-393-32051-0 . ^ Shirokorgoroff, Sergei Mikhailovich (1924). "Social Organization of the Manchus: A Study of the Manchu Clan Organization" . Royal Asiatic Society, North China Branch . 3 . Shanghai: 4. ^ Rhoads, Edward J. M. (2017). Manchus and Han: Ethnic Relations and Political Power in Late Qing and Early Republican China, 1861–1928 . Studies on Ethnic Groups in China. University of Washington Press. p. 72. ISBN 978-0295997483 . ^ Chang, Yin-t'ang (1956). A Regional Handbook on Northeast China .

The Institute. p. 110. ^ David A. Schmidt, Ianfu, the Comfort Women of the Japanese Imperial Army of the Pacific War: Broken Silence ^ Samuel Totten, Paul Robert Bartrop, Steven L. Jacobs (2007). Dictionary of Genocide: M–Z . Greenwood. p. 272. ^ Cocker, Mark (1998). Rivers of blood, rivers of gold: Europe's conflict with tribal peoples . London: Jonathan Cape. p. 308. ISBN 978-0-224-03884-3 . ^ Jan-Bart Gewald (1998). Herero heroes: a socio-political history of the Herero of Namibia, 1890-1923 , James Currey, Oxford ISBN 978-0-82141-256-5 ^ Peace and freedom, Volume 40, Women's International League for Peace and Freedom, page 57, The Section, 1980 ^ a b Ernest Frank Borst-Smith, Caught in the Chinese Revolution: a record of risks and rescue . London: T. Fisher Unwin , 1912. ^ Crossley, Pamela Kyle (1991). Orphan Warriors: Three Manchu Generations and the End of the Qing World (illustrated, reprint ed.). Princeton University Press. p. 197. ISBN 0691008779 . ^ Backhouse, Sir Edmund; Otway, John; Bland, Percy (1914). Annals & Memoirs of the Court of Peking: (from the 16th to the 20th Century) (reprint ed.). Houghton Mifflin. p. 209 . ^ The Atlantic . Vol. 112. Atlantic Monthly Company. 1913. p. 779. ^ The Atlantic Monthly . Vol. 112. Atlantic Monthly Company. 191. p. 779. ^ Rhoads, Edward J. M. (2000). Manchus and Han: Ethnic Relations and Political Power in Late Qing and Early Republican China, 1861–1928 (illustrated, reprint ed.). University of Washington Press. p. 192. ISBN 0-295-98040-0 . ^ Rhoads, Edward J. M. (2000). Manchus and Han: Ethnic Relations and Political Power in Late Qing and Early Republican China, 1861–1928 (illustrated, reprint ed.). University of Washington Press. p. 193. ISBN 0295980400 . ^ Fitzgerald, Charles Patrick; Kotker, Norman (1969). Kotker, Norman (ed.).

The Horizon history of China (illustrated ed.). American Heritage. p. 365. ISBN 978-0-8281-0005-2 . ^ Rhoads, Edward J. M. (2000). Manchus and Han: Ethnic Relations and Political Power in Late Qing and Early Republican China, 1861–1928 . University of Washington. p. 191. ISBN 9780295980409 . ^ Slater, Tom; Dixey, Marsh; and Halperin, James L., Political and Americana Memorabilia Auction , Heritage Auctions, 2005. p. 317. ISBN 978-1-59967-012-6 , Poster is by Ellsworth Young ^ Brownmiller (1975) , pp. 40–48 ^ a b c Takemae, Eiji; Ricketts, Robert; Swann, Sebastian (2003). Allied Occupation of Japan . A&C Black. p. 67. ISBN 978-0-8264-1521-9 . ^ Brownmiller (1975) , p. 44 ^ Crouthamel, Jason (8 January 2017). "Sexuality, Sexual Relations, Homosexuality – 1914–1918" (PDF) . International Encyclopedia of the First World War . pp. 1– 21. ^ Lipkes J. (2007) Rehearsals: The German Army in Belgium, August 1914 , Leuven University Press ^ Dutt, Rajani Palme (1934). "Fascism and Social Revolution" (PDF) . Marxist Internet Archive . p. 121 . Retrieved 20 October 2023 . ^ Alon Confino, Peter Fritzsche, The Work of Memory: New Directions in the Study of German Society and Culture, University of Illinois Press, Urbana, 2002. ISBN 0-252-02717-5 p. 95 ^ Barsoumian, Nanore (7 December 2011). " 'Devilish Marks' and Rape in the Time of Genocide" .

The Armenian Weekly . Retrieved 4 October 2022 . ^ Morris, Benny (2019).

The Thirty-Year Genocide: Turkey's Destruction of Its Christian Minorities, 1894-1924 . Harvard University Press . ISBN 978-0674916456 . ^ Kaiser, Hilmar (2010). "Genocide at the Twilight of the Ottoman Empire".

The Oxford Handbook of Genocide Studies . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-923211-6 . ^ Akçam, Taner (2012).

The Young Turks' Crime against Humanity: The Armenian Genocide and Ethnic Cleansing in the Ottoman Empire . Princeton University Press . ISBN 978-0-691-15333-9 . ^ "Comfort Women Were 'Raped': U.S. Ambassador to Japan" . English.chosun.com . Retrieved 30 April 2014 . ^ Watanabe, Kazuko (1999). "Trafficking in Women's Bodies, Then and Now: The Issue of Military 'Comfort Women' ". Women's Studies Quarterly . 27 (1/2): 19– 31. JSTOR 40003395 . ^ Yoshimi 2000 , pp. 91, 93 ^ Yoon, Bang-Soon L. (2015). "Chapter 20: Sexualized Racism, Gender and Nationalism: The Case of Japan's Sexual Enslavement of Korean "Comfort Women" " .

In Kowner, Rotem; Demel, Walter (eds.). Race and Racism in Modern East Asia: Interactions, Nationalism, Gender and Lineage . Brill's Series on Modern East Asia in a Global Historical Perspective (reprint ed.). BRILL. p. 464. ISBN 978-9004292932 . ^ Qiu, Peipei; Su, Zhiliang; Chen, Lifei (2014). Chinese Comfort Women: Testimonies from Imperial Japan's Sex Slaves . Oxford oral history series (illustrated ed.). Oxford University Press. p. 215. ISBN 978-0199373895 . ^ Paragraph 2, p. 1012, Judgment International Military Tribunal for the Far East . ^ Chang, The Rape of Nanking , p. 89, citing: Catherine Rosair, For One Veteran, Emperor Visit Should Be Atonement ; George Fitch, Nanking Outrages ; Li En-han, Questions of How Many Chinese Were Killed by the Japanese Army in the Great Nanking Massacre ^ Min, Pyong Gap (2021). Korean 'Comfort Women': Military Brothels, Brutality, and the Redress Movement . Genocide, Political Violence, Human Rights. Rutgers University Press. ISBN 978-1978814981 . ^ Tanaka, Yuki (2003). Japan's Comfort Women . Routledge. p. 60. ISBN 1134650124 . Alternative URL ^ Lee, Morgan Pōmaika'i (29 April 2015). "Comfort women were Chinese, Korean, Filipino, Burmese, Thai, Dutch, Australian, and Vietnamese women and girls forced into sexual slavery" . ^ Stetz, Margaret D.; Oh, Bonnie B. C. (12 February 2015). Legacies of the Comfort Women of World War II (illustrated ed.). Routledge. p. 126. ISBN 978-1317466253 . ^ Min, Pyong Gap (2021). Korean 'Comfort Women': Military Brothels, Brutality, and the Redress Movement . Genocide, Political Violence, Human Rights. Rutgers University Press. ISBN 978-1978814981 . ^ Double Agency: Acts of Impersonation in Asian American Literature and Culture . Stanford University Press. 2005. p. 209. ISBN 0804751862 . ^ Linda Trinh Vo, Linda Trinh (2004). "Cultural Autobiography, Testimonial, and Asian American Transnational Feminist Coalition in the 'Comfort Women of World War II' Conference" .

In Vo, Linda Trinh; Sciachitano, Marian (eds.). Asian American Women: The Frontiers Reader (illustrated, reprint ed.). University of Nebraska Press. p. 175. ISBN 0803296274 . ^ Post, Peter, ed. (2009).

The Encyclopedia of Indonesia in the Pacific War: In cooperation with the Netherlands Institute for War Documentation . Vol. 19 of Handbook of Oriental Studies. Section 3 Southeast Asia. BRILL. p. 191. ISBN 978-9004190177 . ^ Stetz, Margaret D.; Oh, Bonnie B. C. (2015). Legacies of the Comfort Women of World War II (illustrated ed.). Routledge. pp. 61– 64. ISBN 978-1317466253 . ^ comfort women (2 October 1945). KOEPANG, TIMOR 1945-10-03. TIMFORCE. TWENTY SIX JAVANESE GIRLS WHO WERE LIBERATED AT KOEPANG FROM JAPANESE BROTHELS. JUST PRIOR TO THEIR RELEASE THE JAPANESE ISSUED THEM WITH RED CROSS ARM BANDS IN AN ATTEMPT TO CAMOUFLAGE THE FOUL MANNER IN WHICH THESE GIRLS HAD BEEN USED. THESE GIRLS WILL NOW BE CARED FOR BY THE NETHERLANDS INDIES CIVIL ADMINISTRATION. (PHOTOGRAPHER K. B. DAVIS) . Australian War Memorial. 120087. ^ Tanaka, Yuki (2003). Japan's Comfort Women . Routledge. p. 81. ISBN 1134650124 . Alternative URL ^ Stetz, Margaret D.; Oh, Bonnie B. C. (2015). Legacies of the Comfort Women of World War II (illustrated ed.). Routledge. p. 63. ISBN 978-1317466253 . ^ JPRI Critique: A Publication of the Japan Policy Research Institute, Volume 9 . Japan Policy Research Institute. p. 1. ^ Post, Peter (2009). "4. Occupation: Coercion and Control" .

The Encyclopedia of Indonesia in the Pacific War: In cooperation with the Netherlands Institute for War Documentation . Vol. 19 van Handbook of Oriental Studies. Section 3 Southeast Asia. BRILL. p. 194. ISBN 978-9004190177 . ^ Post, Peter, ed. (2009).

The Encyclopedia of Indonesia in the Pacific War: In cooperation with the Netherlands Institute for War Documentation . Vol. 19 of Handbook of Oriental Studies. Section 3 Southeast Asia. BRILL. p. 193. ISBN 978-9004190177 . ^ a b " 'Japanese Troops Took Locals as Comfort Women': International" . Pacific Islands Report . 21 September 1999. Archived from the original on 14 April 2021 . Retrieved 19 November 2020 . ^ "Massacres and Atrocities of WWII in the Pacific Region" . members.iinet.net.au . Retrieved 12 May 2021 . ^ Nunn, Gary (18 April 2019). "Bangka Island: The WW2 massacre and a 'truth too awful to speak' " . BBC News . ^ "Interview: Dutch foundation urges Japan to pay honorary debts" . Archived from the original on 19 January 2016 . Retrieved 26 September 2017 . ^ "Taiwan seeking redress over 'comfort women' from Japan" . Archived from the original on 26 September 2017 . Retrieved 26 September 2017 . ^ " 'Comfort Woman' Ellen van der Ploeg passed away" . Archived from the original on 5 January 2016 . Retrieved 1 January 2016 . ^ "Documents detail how Imperial military forced Dutch females to be 'comfort women' " . Japan Times . 7 October 2013. Archived from the original on 2 March 2017. ^ Narayanan, Arujunan (2002). "Japanese war crimes and Allied crimes trials in Borneo during World War II" (PDF) . JEBAT . 29 : 10, 11. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 April 2023 . Retrieved 26 November 2023 . ^ Rickum, Boryano (2014). "Marginalized by Silence- Victims of Japanese Occupation in Indonesia's Political Memory" .

In Stodulka, Thomas; Röttger-Rössler, Birgitt (eds.). Feelings at the Margins: Dealing with Violence, Stigma and Isolation in Indonesia (illustrated ed.). Campus Verlag. p. 184. ISBN 978-3593500058 . ^ Friend, Theodore (2014).

The Blue-Eyed Enemy: Japan against the West in Java and Luzon, 1942-1945 . Princeton University Press. p. 175,176. ISBN 978-1400859467 . ^ Michiko, Nakahara (2001). " "Comfort Women" in Malaysia" . Critical Asian Studies . 33 (4): 581– 589. doi : 10.1080/146727101760107442 . PMID 21046839 . S2CID 36266081 . ^ Loone, Susan (11 August 2001). "Researcher details shattered lives of local comfort women" . malaysiakini . ^ "Researcher details shattered lives of local comfort women" . 11 August 2001. ^ Nanda, Akshita (23 January 2017). "Stirring look at comfort women in Singapore" .

The Straits Times . ^ Pillai, Patrick (2016). "Chitty+girls+being+hastily"&pg=PP66 Yearning to Belong . Flipside Digital Content Company Inc. p. 47. ISBN 978-9814762007 . ^ Russell, Edward Frederick Langley (2016).

The Knights of Bushido: A History of Japanese War Crimes during World War II . Frontline Books. p. 93. ISBN 978-1473887596 . ^ Russell, Edward Frederick Langley (2016). "young+Tamil+women+were+forced+to+dance"&pg=PT107 The Knights of Bushido: A History of Japanese War Crimes During World War II (reprint ed.). Simon and Schuster. ISBN 978-1510710375 . ^ Kratoska, Paul H., ed. (2006).

The Thailand-Burma Railway, 1942-1946: Asian labour . Vol. 4 (illustrated ed.). Taylor & Francis. p. 161. ISBN 0415309549 . ^ Donaldson, Gary (1996). America at War Since 1945: Politics and Diplomacy in Korea, Vietnam, and the Gulf War . Religious Studies; 39 (illustrated ed.). Greenwood. p. 75. ISBN 0275956601 . ^ Chen, King C. (2015). Vietnam and China, 1938-1954 . Vol. 2134 of Princeton Legacy Library (reprint ed.). Princeton University Press. p. 195. ISBN 978-1400874903 . ^ For detailed accounts of rapes by Australian occupation troop during the occupation of Japan, see Allan Clifton, Time of Fallen Blossoms . "Australian Military Gang Rape of 'Fallen Blossoms ' " . Archived 13 June 2007 at the Wayback Machine ^ Tanaka & Tanaka 2003 , p. 110–111. ^ a b Brownmiller (1975) , p. 81 ^ Tanaka & Tanaka 2003 , p. 111. ^ Tanaka & Tanaka 2003 , p. 112. ^ Schrijvers, Peter (2002).

The GI War Against Japan . New York City: New York University Press. p. 212. ISBN 978-0-8147-9816-4 . ^ Walsh 2018 , p. 1204. ^ Tanaka & Tanaka 2003 , p. 118. ^ Walsh 2018 , p. 1217. ^ Walsh 2018 , p. 1218. ^ Walsh 2018 , p. 1219. ^ "Soldier Faces Death Sentence Kobe, Japan" . St. Petersburg Times . 3 September 1950. ^ https://files.deathpenaltyinfo.org/documents/MilitaryExecutions.pdf ^ Parker, Clark (12 December 2016). "Occupied Japan: The Kokura incident, "committing excesses", and murder on the 4th of July 「黒地の絵」" . the tokyo files 東京ファイル . ^ Roehner, Bertrand M. RELATIONS BETWEEN ALLIED FORCES AND THE POPULATION OF JAPAN (PDF) (Report). Institute for Theoretical and High Energy Physics, University of Paris 6 Laboratoire de Physique Th´eorique et Hautes ´Energies, UPMC, Paris Working Report. ^ Bowers, William T.; Hammond, William M.; MacGarrigle, George L. (1997). Black Soldier, White Army: The 24th Infantry Regiment in Korea (illustrated ed.). DIANE Publishing. ISBN 0788139908 . ^ Morris-Suzuki, Tessa (27 December 2013). "Lavish are the Dead: Re-envisioning Japan's Korean War 死者の奢り あらためて日本の朝鮮戦争を思い浮かべる" . Asia-Pacific Journal : Japan Focus . 11 (52). ^ ISHIMARU, Yasuzo (December 2007). "The Korean War and Japanese Ports: Support for the UN Forces and Its Influences" (PDF) . NIDS Security Reports (8): 55-70. ^ 李, 彦樺 (31 March 2015). "松本清張「黒地の絵」論" . 99 . 國文學: 1-30. ISSN 0389-8628 . Archived from the original on 2 January 2024. {{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ Parker, Clark (12 December 2016). "Occupied Japan: The Kokura incident, "committing excesses", and murder on the 4th of July 「黒地の絵」" . the tokyo files 東京ファイル . ^ Media, Propaganda and Politics in 20th-Century Japan SOAS Studies in Modern and Contemporary Japan . Barak Kushner , Yoichi Funabashi. Bloomsbury Publishing. 2015. ISBN 147251226X . {{ cite book }} : CS1 maint: others ( link ) ^ KASHIMA, Takumi (30 December 2012). "Matsumoto Seicho's Kuroji-no-E His Origin of Dynamism A Critical Biography of Matsumoto Seicho,1958" .

The Journal of Nagasaki University of Foreign Studies (16). 長崎外国語大学: 1– 36. ISSN 1346-4981 . ^ Yamamoto, Mari (2004). Grassroots Pacifism in Post-War Japan: The Rebirth of a Nation . Routledge Japanese Studies Series (illustrated ed.). Routledge. p. 254. ISBN 1134308183 . ^ Matsumoto, Seicho (1 January 1965). 『黒地の絵』 Kuroji no e . Shinchosha. ISBN 4101109036 . ^ Molasky, Michael S. (2005).

The American Occupation of Japan and Okinawa: Literature and Memory . Routledge Studies in Asia's Transformations. Vol. 1. Routledge. p. 86. ISBN 1134652798 . ^ KASHIMA, Takumi (30 December 2012). "「黒地の絵」-松本清張のダイナミズム- 評伝松本清張:昭和33年" .

The Journal of Nagasaki University of Foreign Studies (16). 長崎外国語大学: 1– 36. ISSN 1346-4981 . ^ Molasky, Michael S. (2005).

The American Occupation of Japan and Okinawa: Literature and Memory . Vol. 1. Routledge. p. 86. ISBN 1134652798 . ^ "●イーストウッドに「黒地の絵」の映画化を" . 2 April 2015. ^ Hannah Pakula (2009).

The last empress: Madame Chiang Kai-Shek and the birth of modern China . Simon and Schuster. p. 530 . ISBN 978-1-4391-4893-8 . ^ Asmolov, Konstantin (2008). "Pobeda na Dal'nem Vostoke" .

In Dyukov, Aleksandr; Pyhalov, Igor (eds.). Velikaya obolgannaya voina (in Russian). Vol. 2. Moscow: Yauza. Archived from the original on 4 September 2017 . Retrieved 11 August 2019 . ^ Tanaka, Yuki (2019). Hidden Horrors: Japanese War Crimes In World War Ii (reprint ed.). Routledge. p. 102. ISBN 978-0429720895 . ^ Askin 1997 , p. 64. ^ Tanaka, Toshiyuki (1996). "Japanese+officers+to+provide+a+number+of+nurses+as+prostitutes,+as+they+believed+this+would+minimizee+the+number+of+rapes+by+Soviet+soldiers" Hidden Horrors: Japanese War Crimes In World War Ii . Transitions: Asia and the Pacific (3, illustrated ed.). Avalon Publishing. p. 102. ISBN 0813327172 . ^ Tanaka, Yuki (2017). Hidden Horrors: Japanese War Crimes in World War II (2, illustrated, reprint ed.). Rowman & Littlefield. p. 114. ISBN 978-1538102701 . ^ Tanaka, Yuki (1998). Sajor, Indai Lourdes (ed.). Common Grounds: Violence Against Women in War and Armed Conflict Situations . Asian Center for Women's Human Rights. p. 173. ISBN 9719199105 . ^ Tanaka, Toshiyuki; Tanaka, Yukiko (1995). Rape and War: The Japanese Experience . Vol. 24 of Papers of the Japanese Studies Centre. Japanese Studies Centre. p. 38. ISBN 0732606462 . ISSN 0725-0177 . ^ Ward, Rowena (1 March 2007). "Left Behind: Japan's Wartime Defeat and the Stranded Women of Manchukuo" .

The Asia-Pacific Journal: Japan Focus . 5 (3). ^ Emsley, Clive (2013). Soldier, Sailor, Beggarman, Thief: Crime and the British Armed Services since 1914 . Oxford University Press, USA, p. 128–129; ISBN 0199653712 ^ a b Longden, Sean (2004). To the Victor the Spoils: D-Day to Ve Day, the Reality Behind the Heroism . Arris Books, p. 195. ISBN 1844370380 ^ Carroll, Rory (25 June 2001). "Italy's bloody secret" .

The Guardian . London . Retrieved 22 November 2008 . ^ Wieviorka, Olivier (2010). Normandy: From the Landings to the Liberation of Paris . Belknap Press of Harvard University Press . p. 329. ISBN 978-0674047471 . ^ Lilly, Robert J. (2007). Taken by Force: Rape and American GIs in Europe During World War II . Palgrave Macmillan . ISBN 978-0-230-50647-3 . ^ Morrow, John H. (October 2008). " Taken by Force: Rape and American GIs in Europe during World War II By J. Robert Lilly".

The Journal of Military History . 72 (4): 1324. doi : 10.1353/jmh.0.0151 . S2CID 162399427 . ^ Schofield, Hugh (5 June 2009). "Revisionists challenge D-Day story" . BBC News . Retrieved 6 January 2010 . ^ J Robert Lilly. Taken by Force: Rape and American GIs in Europe during World War II . ISBN 978-0-230-50647-3 p.12 ^ Harrington, Carol (2010). Politicization of Sexual Violence: From Abolitionism to Peacekeeping . London: Ashgate. pp. 80–81. ISBN 0-7546-7458-4 . ^ Anna Reading .

The Social Inheritance of the Holocaust: Gender, Culture, and Memory . Macmillan, 2002. ISBN 0-333-76147-2 , ISBN 978-0-333-76147-2 p. 166 ^ Johnson, Daniel (24 January 2002). "Red Army troops raped even Soviet and Polish women as they freed them from camps" .

The Daily Telegraph . Retrieved 30 April 2014 . ^ Alma Mater 64 (2004) – "Okupowany Kraków- z prorektorem Andrzejem Chwalbą rozmawia Rita Pagacz-Moczarska" ^ Beevor, Antony (1 May 2002). "They raped every German female from eight to 80" .

The Guardian . London . Retrieved 6 April 2010 . ^ Johnson, Daniel (24 January 2002). "Red Army troops raped even Russian women as they freed them from camps" .

The Daily Telegraph . London . Retrieved 6 April 2010 . ^ Grossmann, Atina (1995). "A Question of Silence: The Rape of German Women by Occupation Soldiers" . October . 72 : 43– 63. doi : 10.2307/778926 . JSTOR 778926 . ^ Heineman, Elizabeth (1996). "The Hour of the Woman: Memories of Germany's 'Crisis Years' and West German National Identity". American Historical Review . 101 (2): 354– 395. doi : 10.2307/2170395 . JSTOR 2170395 . ^ Kuwert, P.; Freyberger, H. (2007). "The unspoken secret: Sexual violence in World War II" . International Psychogeriatrics . 19 (4): 782– 784. doi : 10.1017/S1041610207005376 . PMID 17726764 . ^ a b "World Wars: The Battle for Berlin in World War Two" . BBC History . Retrieved 10 December 2014 . ^ Hanna Schissler (2001).

The Miracle Years: A Cultural History of West Germany, 1949–1968 . Princeton University Press. p. 28. ISBN 0-691-05820-2 . ^ "Silence Broken on Red Army Rapes in Germany" . NPR. 17 July 2009. ^ Hitchcock, William I. (2004).

The Struggle for Europe: The Turbulent History of a Divided Continent, 1945 to the Present . Anchor Books. ISBN 978-0-385-49799-2 . ^ Atina Grossmann. "A Question of Silence: The Rape of German Women by Occupation Soldiers". October , Vol. 72, Berlin 1945: War and Rape "Liberators Take Liberties" (Spring, 1995), pp. 42–63. MIT Press ^ Helke Sander/Barbara Johr: Befreier und Befreite , Fischer, Frankfurt 2005 ^ Seidler/ Zayas : Kriegsverbrechen in Europa und im Nahen Osten im 20. Jahrhundert , Mittler, Hamburg Berlin Bonn 2002 ^ Sheehan, Paul (17 May 2003). "An orgy of denial in Hitler's bunker" .

The Sydney Morning Herald . ^ Beevor, Antony (1 May 2002). "They raped every German female from eight to 80" .

The Guardian . London. ^ Antony Beevor, The Fall of Berlin 1945 . ^ Richard Bessel , Germany 1945 . ^ Norman M. Naimark.

The Russians in Germany: A History of the Soviet Zone of Occupation, 1945–1949. Harvard University Press, 1995. pp. 132, 133. ISBN 0-674-78405-7 . ^ Beevor, Antony (2002).

The fall of Berlin, 1945 . New York. ISBN 0-670-03041-4 . OCLC 49704311 . {{ cite book }} : CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Biess, Frank; Moeller, Robert G. (2010). Histories of the aftermath: the legacies of the Second World War in Europe . New York: Berghahn Books. pp. 20– 21. ISBN 978-1-84545-998-7 . OCLC 732958386 . ^ Djilas, Milovan . Conversations with Stalin . ^ Hunter, Lynn Joyce (24 November 2013). " 'Silenced Shame': Hungarian Women Remember Wartime Rapes" . Washington Post . BUDAPEST. ^ Director: Skrabski Fruzsina director of photography: Daniel Farkas (9 September 2013). Silenced shame - OFFICIAL TRAILER (youtube) (trailer). ^ 十一万人的志愿军后勤部队中，从1952年一月到十一月中，共发生自杀一百零九人，自伤的三十九人，逃亡的六百八十七人，汽车肇事压死的八十一人，压伤的九十四人，误伤的一百零八人，强奸的四十一人，通奸的五百一十四人，鸡奸的一百五十人。"金盾出版社1986年7月1版《抗美援朝战争后勤经验总结 资料选编综合类下册 (Lessons About Logistics in Resist US and Aid Korea War: Comprehensive Selected Materials Vol.2)》，P427 ^ "We Accuse! (Report of the Women's International Commission for the Investigation of War Atrocities in Korea)" . 16–27 May 1951. ^ Jens Hanssen; Amal N. Ghazal (2020).

The Oxford Handbook of Contemporary Middle Eastern and North African History . Oxford University Press. p. 261. ISBN 978-0-19-165279-0 . ^ Marnia Lazreg (1994).

The New Yorker . 18 October 1969 . Retrieved 25 June 2013 . ^ Cherenfant, Sabine (2018). How Vietnamese Immigrants Made America Home . Coming to America: The History of Immigration to the United States. Rosen. p. 61. ISBN 978-1508181408 . ^ Congressional Record, V. 151, Pt. 12, July 14 to July 22, 2005 . Government Printing Office. 30 December 2009. p. 2. ISBN 9780160848032 . ^ Ramos-Horta, Jose (1996) . Funu: The unfinished saga of East Timor . Lawrenceville, New Jersey: The Red Sea Press. p. 207. ISBN 9780932415158 . ^ Congressional Record, V. 151, Pt. 12, July 14 to July 22, 2005 . Government Printing Office. 30 December 2009. p. 2. ISBN 9780160848032 . ^ "Pemerintah Didesak Hentikan Kekerasan Terhadap Perempuan Papua" . VOA Indonesia (in Indonesian). 19 October 2017 . Retrieved 31 July 2020 . ^ "East Pakistan: Even the Skies Weep" , Time , 25 October 1971. ^ Hossain, Anushay. "1971 Rapes: Bangladesh Cannot Hide History" . Forbes . Retrieved 1 April 2016 . ^ a b c d e f Thomas, Dorothy Q.; Reagan, E. Ralph (1994). "Rape in War: Challenging the Tradition of Impunity" . SAIS Review, Johns Hopkins University Press. Archived from the original on 6 March 2008. ^ Laura Smith-Spark (8 December 2004). "How did rape become a weapon of war?" . BBC News . Retrieved 13 October 2008 . ^ Debasish Roy Chowdhury "Indians are bastards anyway" . Asia Times Online . 23 June 2005. ^ "Hamoodur Rahman Commission" , Chapter 2 Archived 12 October 2014 at the Wayback Machine , Paragraphs 32,34 ^ Salma Khatun. Sarmila Bose Rewrites history website of Drishtipat "A non-profit, non-political expatriate Bangladeshi organization ... registered public charity in the United States." ^ D'Costa, Bina (2011). Nationbuilding, Gender and War Crimes in South Asia . Routledge. p. 104. ^ "Women, War, and the Making of Bangladesh" . Duke University Press . Retrieved 15 March 2016 . ^ Anam, Tahmima (26 December 2013). "Pakistan's State of Denial" .

The Irish Times . 28 March 2021 . Retrieved 28 March 2021 . {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ a b Kassa, Lucy; Pujol-Mazzini, Anna (27 March 2021). " 'We're here to make you HIV positive': Hundreds of women rush to Tigray hospitals as soldiers use rape as weapon of war" .

The Daily Telegraph . Retrieved 28 March 2021 . {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ Gelaw, Abraham (13 July 2021). "UNFPA Ethiopia response to the Tigray crisis – Situation Report 15 to 30 June 2021" (PDF) . United Nations Population Fund . Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 August 2021 . Retrieved 20 November 2021 . ^ Hayes, Helen ; Cleverly, James (25 March 2021). "Conflict in Tigray Region of Ethiopia – Volume 691: debated on Thursday 25 March 2021" . Hansard . Retrieved 28 March 2021 . {{ cite web }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ "Ethiopia's Tigray crisis: 'I lost my hand when a soldier tried to rape me' " . BBC News . 15 February 2021 . Retrieved 15 February 2021 . {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ Feleke, Bethlehem; Mackintosh, Eliza; Mezzofiore, Gianluca (20 March 2020). " 'Practically this has been a genocide' – Doctors say rape is being used as a weapon of war in Ethiopia's conflict" . CNN . Retrieved 20 March 2021 . {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ "Ethiopia: Summary killings, rape and looting by Tigrayan forces in Amhara" . Amnesty International . 16 February 2022 . Retrieved 17 February 2022 . ^ Kassa, Lucy; York, Geoffrey (29 November 2021). "Sexual violence as weapon of war spreads to new regions in Ethiopia" .

The Globe and Mail . Retrieved 29 November 2021 . {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ Fisseha, Girmatsion; Gebrehiwot, Tesfay Gebregzabher; Gebremichael, Mengistu Welday; Wahdey, Shishay; Meles, Gebrekiros Gebremichael; Gezae, Kebede Embaye; Legesse, Awol Yemane; Asgedom, Akeza Awealom; Tsadik, Mache; Woldemichael, Abraha; Gebreyesus, Aregawi; Abebe, Haftom Temesgen; Haile, Yibrah Alemayehu; Gezahegn, Selome; Aregawi, Maru (21 July 2023). "War-related sexual and gender-based violence in Tigray, Northern Ethiopia: a community-based study" . BMJ Global Health . 8 (7). doi : 10.1136/bmjgh-2022-010270 . ISSN 2059-7908 . PMC 10364179 . ^ McClure, Tess; Borrazas, Ximena (30 June 2025). "Rusted screws, metal spikes and plastic rubbish: the horrific sexual violence used against Tigray's women" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 6 September 2025 . ^ a b c Phyu Phyu Oo; Davies, Sara (28 June 2021). "Supporting the victims of sexual violence in Myanmar" . Lowy Institute . Retrieved 15 March 2023 . ^ "Myanmar's Ongoing War Against Women" . United States Institute of Peace . 30 November 2021. Archived from the original on 1 December 2021 . Retrieved 15 March 2023 . ^ "Myanmar army killed 17 people in 2 villages, residents say" . AP News . 6 March 2023 . Retrieved 11 March 2023 . ^ "Myanmar Regime Task Force Leaves Trail of Beheaded and Mutilated Victims" .

The Irrawaddy . 10 March 2023 . Retrieved 11 March 2023 . ^ Philp, Catherine. " 'Russian soldiers raped me as my terrified son cried' " .

The Times . ISSN 0140-0460 . Retrieved 30 March 2022 . ^ McKernan, Bethan (4 April 2022). "Rape as a weapon: huge scale of sexual violence inflicted in Ukraine emerges" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 6 April 2022 . ^ "25 women and girls say they were raped by Russian troops in Bucha – Ukrainian official" . BBC News . 6 April 2022 . Retrieved 6 April 2022 . ^ "Russian Woman Tells Partner To Rape Ukrainians in Chilling Audio—Report" . Newsweek . 13 April 2022. ^ Chen, Philip; Wang, Tim; Lister, Josh; Pennington, Heather (15 October 2022). "Russia using rape as 'military strategy' in Ukraine: UN envoy" . CNN . Retrieved 2 December 2022 . ^ Besheer, Margaret (4 March 2024). "UN Mission Says It Has 'Clear and Convincing' Information That Hamas Sexually Violated Women" . Voice of America . Retrieved 13 March 2024 . ^ a b Borger, Julian (4 March 2024). "UN finds 'convincing information' that Hamas raped and tortured Israeli hostages" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 5 March 2024 . ^ "UN team says Hamas likely carried out sexual violence in Israel on 7 October" . BBC News . 5 March 2024 . Retrieved 5 March 2024 . ^ "Reasonable Grounds to Believe Conflict-Related Sexual Violence Occurred in Israel During 7 October Attacks, Senior UN Official Tells Security Council" . press.un.org . Retrieved 8 November 2025 . ^ Lederer, Edith M. (4 March 2024). "A UN envoy says there are 'reasonable grounds' to believe Hamas committed sexual violence on Oct. 7" . AP News . Retrieved 13 March 2024 . ^ Philp, Catherine; Weiniger, Gabrielle (1 August 2024). "Israel says Hamas weaponised rape. Does the evidence add up?" .

The Times . Retrieved 1 August 2024 . ^ Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the Occupied Palestinian Territory (12 June 2024). Report of the Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and Israel (Report). Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights. ^ "EU sanctions Hamas wings over sexual violence on Oct. 7" . Reuters . 12 April 2024 . Retrieved 12 April 2024 . ^ "EU sanctions Hamas wings over sexual violence on Oct. 7" . Al Arabiya . 12 April 2024 . Retrieved 12 April 2024 . ^ "Conflict-Related Sexual Violence: Report of the United Nations Secretary-General 2023" (PDF) . United Nations . 23 April 2024 . Retrieved 24 March 2025 . ^ "UN fails to black list Hamas for rape, Israel condemns decision while US is silent" .

The Jerusalem Post . 24 April 2024 . Retrieved 24 May 2024 . ^ "Israel fumes as UN secretary-general leaves Hamas off sexual violence blacklist" .

The Times of Israel . 23 April 2024. ISSN 0040-7909 . ^ Eichner, Itamar (23 April 2024). "UN Secretary-General excludes Hamas from conflict-related sexual violence list" . Ynetnews . Retrieved 24 May 2024 . ^ Rozovsky, Liza. "For first time, UN blacklists Hamas for sexual violence on October 7, against hostages" . Haaretz.com . Archived from the original on 20 August 2025 . Retrieved 8 November 2025 . ^ "Conflict-related sexual violence - Report of the Secretary-General 2024 (S/2025/389)" . UN . Retrieved 16 September 2025 . ^ Kottasová, Ivana (20 May 2024). "EXCLUSIVE: ICC seeks arrest warrants against Sinwar and Netanyahu for war crimes over October 7 attack and Gaza war" . CNN . Retrieved 20 May 2024 . ^ "What the ICC arrest warrants against Netanyahu, Gallant, and Deif say" . Reuters . 21 November 2024. ^ "Israeli authorities, Palestinian armed groups are responsible for war crimes, other grave violations of international law, UN Inquiry finds" . UN Human Rights Office . 12 June 2024. ^ Gates, Scott (September 2017). "Membership matters: Coerced recruits and rebel allegiance" (PDF) . Journal of Peace Research . 54 (5): 674– 686. doi : 10.1177/0022343317722700 . hdl : 10852/64966 . S2CID 117438939 . Retrieved 23 August 2021 . ^ Humphrey, Michael; Valverde, Estela (2007). "Human Rights, Victimhood, and Impunity: An Anthropology of Democracy in Argentina" . Social Analysis: The International Journal of Social and Cultural Practice . 51 (1): 179– 197. JSTOR 23182149 . Retrieved 23 August 2021 . ^ Balcells, Laia; Stanton, Jessica A. (11 May 2021). "Violence Against Civilians During Armed Conflict: Moving Beyond the Macro- and Micro-Level Divide" . Annual Review of Political Science . 24 (1): 45– 69. doi : 10.1146/annurev-polisci-041719-102229 . ^ medica mondiale. "Sexualised wartime violence" . medicamondiale.org . Retrieved 4 May 2023 . ^ Brown C (2012). "Rape as a weapon of war in the Democratic Republic of the Congo". Torture . 22 (1): 24– 37. PMID 23086003 . ^ "Sexual violence as a weapon of war" . unicef.org . Archived from the original on 20 March 2018 . Retrieved 22 December 2016 . ^ "Rape: Weapon of war" . OHCHR. ^ a b Skjelsbæk, Inger (13 February 2012).

The Political Psychology of War Rape: Studies from Bosnia and Herzegovina . Routledge. ISBN 978-1-136-62092-8 . ^ a b Cohen, D.K. (2011). "Causes of Sexual Violence During Civil War: Cross-National Evidence (1980–2009) Prepared for the Minnesota International Relations Colloquium, March 28, 2011." ^ a b Smith-Spark, Laura (8 December 2004). "How did rape become a weapon of war?" . BBC News . Retrieved 28 July 2008 . ^ Spivak, Gayatri Chakravorty (1999). A Critique of Postcolonial Reason: Towards a History of the Vanishing Present . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. p. 300. ISBN 978-0-674-17764-2 .

The group rape perpetrated by the conquerors is a metonymic celebration of territorial acquisition ^ a b c d Nyssen, Jan ; others (19 July 2021). "From Apologies to Atrocities: How to make sense of leadership statements in Ethiopia" . World Peace Foundation . Archived from the original on 15 July 2021 . Retrieved 21 July 2021 . ^ a b de Waal, Alex (19 July 2021). "July 2021 Employee of the Month: Abiy Ahmed" . World Peace Foundation . Archived from the original on 21 July 2021 . Retrieved 21 July 2021 . ^ a b Askin (1997) , pp. 12–13 ^ a b c d e f Storr, Will (17 July 2011). "The rape of men" .

The Guardian . London . Retrieved 17 July 2011 . ^ Watts, Charlotte; Zimmerman, Cathy (2002). "Violence Against Women: Global Scope and Magnitude" .

The Lancet . 359 (9313): 1232– 1237. doi : 10.1016/S0140-6736(02)08221-1 . PMID 11955557 . S2CID 38436965 . ^ Askin (1997) , p. 13 ^ Askin (1997) , pp. 10–21 ^ Levinson, Bernard M (2004). Gender and Law in the Hebrew Bible and the Ancient Near East . A&C Black. p. 20. ISBN 978-0-567-08098-1 . ^ Stemple, Lara (1 January 2009). "Male Rape and Human Rights" . Hastings Law Journal . 60 (3): 605. ^ Stemple, p. 612. ^ "IRIN Africa | HEALTH: Rape as a "weapon of war" against men" . IRIN. 13 October 2011 . Retrieved 30 April 2014 . ^ Eichert, David (2019). " 'Homosexualization' Revisited: An Audience-Focused Theorization of Wartime Male Sexual Violence". International Feminist Journal of Politics . 21 (3): 409– 433. doi : 10.1080/14616742.2018.1522264 . S2CID 150313647 . ^ Grace Natabaalo. "Male rape survivors fight stigma in Uganda – Features" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 30 April 2014 . ^ Njoku, Emeka; Dery, Isaac (2021). "Spiritual security: an explanatory framework for conflict-related sexual violence against men" . International Relations . 97 (6): 1785– 1803. doi : 10.1093/ia/iiab175 . ^ Tol, Wietse A; Stavrou, Vivi; Greene, M Claire; Mergenthaler, Christina; van Ommeren, Mark; García Moreno, Claudia (5 August 2013). "Sexual and gender-based violence in areas of armed conflict: a systematic review of mental health and psychosocial support interventions" . Conflict and Health . 7 (1): 16. doi : 10.1186/1752-1505-7-16 . PMC 3750365 . PMID 23915821 . ^ O'Brien, Daniel P; Venis, Sarah; Greig, Jane; Shanks, Leslie; Ellman, Tom; Sabapathy, Kalpana; Frigati, Lisa; Mills, Clair (17 June 2010). "Provision of antiretroviral treatment in conflict settings: the experience of Médecins Sans Frontières" . Conflict and Health . 4 (1): 12. doi : 10.1186/1752-1505-4-12 . PMC 2911421 . PMID 20553624 . ^ "Rwanda" . Women Under Siege Project . Retrieved 2 December 2013 . ^ Loncar, Mladen (29 July 2009). "Mental Health Consequences in Men Exposed to Sexual Abuse During the War in Croatia and Bosnia" . Journal of Interpersonal Violence . 25 (2): 192– 193. doi : 10.1177/0886260509334288 . PMID 19641182 . S2CID 10940808 – via SAGE Journals. ^ a b c d e Martens, Jackie (24 January 2004). " Congo rape victims seek solace ". BBC News . ^ United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. "Sexual and Gender-Based Violence against Refugees, Returnees and Internally Displaced Persons. Guidelines for Prevention and Response, UNHCR (SGVB Guidelines)" (PDF) . United Nations High Commission for Refugees . Retrieved 30 April 2014 . ^ "War, rape and genocide: From ancient times to the Sudan" . Apha.confex.com. Archived from the original on 11 August 2011 . Retrieved 30 April 2014 . ^ a b c d Hagen, Kristen; Yohani, Sophie (21 November 2010). "The Nature and Psychosocial Consequences of War Rape for Individuals and Communities" . International Journal of Psychological Studies . 2 (2). doi : 10.5539/ijps.v2n2p14 . ^ Skjelsbæk, Inger (25 July 2016). "Victim and Survivor: Narrated Social Identities of Women Who Experienced Rape During the War in Bosnia-Herzegovina". Feminism & Psychology . 16 (4): 373– 403. doi : 10.1177/0959353506068746 . S2CID 145206051 . ^ Østby, Gudrun; Leiby, Michele; Nordås, Ragnhild (2019). "The Legacy of Wartime Violence on Intimate-Partner Abuse: Microlevel Evidence from Peru, 1980–2009". International Studies Quarterly . 63 (1): 1– 14. doi : 10.1093/isq/sqy043 . ^ Rose, Sofie (16 March 2025). "Locating the stigmatisation of children born of wartime rape on a continuum of violence" .

The International Journal of Human Rights . 29 (3): 470– 494. doi : 10.1080/13642987.2024.2418468 . ISSN 1364-2987 . ^ Ward, Jeanne; Marsh, Mendy (2006). Sexual Violence Against Women and Girls in War and Its Aftermath: Realities, Responses, and Required Resources (PDF) (Report). ^ a b Bloomfield, David; Barnes, Teresa; Huyse, Luc (2003). Reconciliation after Violent Conflict: A Handbook . International IDEA. p. 61. ISBN 91-89098-91-9 . ^ Clifford, Cassandra (2008). Rape as a Weapon of War and it's Long-term Effects on Victims and Society (Report). CiteSeerX 10.1.1.512.4507 . ^ Diken, Bülent; Laustsen, Carsten Bagge (29 June 2016). "Becoming Abject: Rape as a Weapon of War" . Body & Society . 11 (1): 111– 128. doi : 10.1177/1357034X05049853 . S2CID 38415616 . ^ Russel-Brown, Sherrie L. (2003). "Rape as an Act of Genocide". Berkeley Journal of International Law . 21 (2): 350– 374. doi : 10.15779/Z380M0V . ^ Cassandra Clifford: "Rape as a Weapon of War and it's Long-term Effects on Victims and Society", paper presented at the 7th Global Conference on Violence and the Contexts of Hostility, 5–7 May 2008, Budapest, p. 4. ^ "Rape and HIV as Weapons of War – United Nations University" . Unu.edu. Archived from the original on 14 November 2020 . Retrieved 30 April 2014 . ^ Carpenter, Charli. War's Impact on Children Born of Rape and Sexual Exploitation: Physical, Economic and Psychosocial Dimensions (PDF) (Report). ^ Daniel-Wrabetz, Joana (2007). "Children Born of War Rape in Bosnia-Herzegovina and the Convention on the Rights of the Child".

In Carpenter, Charli (ed.). Born of War: Protecting Children of Sexual Violence Survivors in Conflict Zones . Lynne Rienner. pp. 21– 39. ^ Holt, Kate; Hughes, Sarah (13 December 2005). "Bosnia's rape babies: abandoned by their families, forgotten by the state" .

The Independent . ^ Apio, Eunice (2007). "Uganda's Forgotten Children of War".

In Carpenter, Charli (ed.). Born of War: Protecting Children of Sexual Violence Survivors in Conflict Zones . Lynne Rienner. pp. 94– 109. ^ McKinley, James (23 September 1996). "Legacy of Rwanda Violence: The Thousands Born of Rape" .

The New York Times . ^ "United Nations Official Document" . United Nations . Retrieved 30 April 2014 . ^ "Rape: Weapon of war" . Ohchr.org . Retrieved 30 April 2014 . ^ a b "Rwanda" . Human Rights Watch . Retrieved 30 April 2014 . ^ "United Nations Official Document" . United Nations . Retrieved 30 April 2014 . , p. 16. ^ "Physicians for Human Rights: Nowhere to Turn: Failure to Protect, Support and Assure Justice to Darfuri Women" (PDF) . 2009. p. 4. ^ a b Analysing Disrupted Health Sectors: A Modular Manual. Department of Recovery and Transition Programmes Health Action in Crises . World Health Organization. June 2009. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.410.6623 . ISBN 978-92-4-159926-9 . ^ Hollifield, Michael (April 2005). "Taking measure of war trauma".

The Lancet . 365 (9467): 1283– 1284. doi : 10.1016/S0140-6736(05)61003-3 . PMID 15823362 . S2CID 5158023 . ^ Joachim, I. (2004). "Sexualised violence in war and its consequences".

In Mondiale, Medica (ed.). Violence against women in war: Handbook for professionals working with traumatized women . Cologne, Germany: Prisma, Saarbrücken. pp. 63– 110. ^ Rojnik, B.; Andolsek-Jeras, L.; Obersnel-Kveder, D. (March 1995). "Women in difficult circumstances: war victims and refugees". International Journal of Gynecology & Obstetrics . 48 (3): 311– 315. doi : 10.1016/0020-7292(94)02302-F . PMID 7781876 . S2CID 34916824 . ^ Kerstiens, Frances (October 2004). War Rape: The Aftermath for Women (PDF) (MA). Royal Roads University. p. 61-62. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 July 2022 . Retrieved 1 July 2022 . ^ "UNICEF" . unicef.org . ^ a b de Brouwer (2005) , p. 9 ^ a b c de Brouwer (2005) , p. 10 ^ a b c d e f "Kosovo: rape as a weapon of "ethnic cleansing" " (PDF) . www.hrw.org . ^ a b c d e de Brouwer (2005) , p. 11 ^ "War rape in the former Yugoslavia" . Radio Netherlands Archives . 10 December 1992. ^ de Brouwer (2005) , pp. 9–10 ^ Angela Robson. "Rape: Weapon of War" . New Internationalist issue 244, June 1993. ^ "Bosnia: Landmark Verdicts for Rape, Torture, and Sexual Enslavement: Criminal Tribunal Convicts Bosnian Serbs for Crimes Against Humanity" . Human Rights News 22 February 2001. ^ Halilovic Aldi (21 December 2000). "Odjek – revija za umjetnost i nauku – Zločin silovanja u BiH" . Odjek.ba. Archived from the original on 25 November 2011 . Retrieved 30 April 2014 . ^ "Grbavica (film)" . Coop99.at . Retrieved 30 April 2014 . ^ "ICTY – TPIY" . United Nations . Retrieved 23 September 2014 . ^ Archived 10 September 2008 at the Wayback Machine ^ "findarticles.com" . Retrieved 23 September 2014 – via Find Articles. ^ Andrew Osborn (23 February 2001). "Mass rape ruled a war crime" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 30 April 2014 . ^ "findarticles.com" . Retrieved 23 September 2014 – via Find Articles. ^ a b c d e de Brouwer (2005) , p. 13 ^ a b c d de Brouwer (2005) , p. 14 ^ Barstow, Anne Llewellyn (2000). War's dirty secret: Rape, prostitution, and other crimes against women . Pilgrim Press. ^ "Human Rights Watch World Report 1998" . Retrieved 11 July 2011 . ^ "United Nation's Report of the Special Rapporteur on violence against women, its causes and consequences, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy" . 2000 . Retrieved 13 July 2011 . ^ "1,500 Moro massacre victims during Martial Law honored" . Minda News . 26 September 2014. ^ "morowomen.com" . Archived from the original on 30 June 2015 . Retrieved 5 September 2015 . ^ McEvoy, Mark (3 April 2014). "Chittagong Hill Tracts of Bangladesh – rapists act with impunity" . Survival International – The movement for tribal peoples . ^ Chinkin, Christine. "Rape and sexual abuse of women in international law." European Journal of International Law 5.3 (1994): 327. "women in Kashmir who have suffered rape and death under the administration of the Indian army." ^ Inger Skjelsbæk (2001) Sexual violence in times of war: A new challenge for peace operations? , International Peacekeeping, 8:2, 75–76 " ^ Sharon Frederick (2001). Rape: Weapon of Terror . World Scientific. pp. 101–. ISBN 978-981-4350-95-2 . Archived from the original on 20 April 2017 . Retrieved 19 April 2017 . ^ "RAPE IN KASHMIR: A Crime of War" Archived 4 September 2012 at the Wayback Machine (PDF). Asia Watch & Physicians for Human Rights A Division of Human Rights Watch . 5 (9): 6. ^ "Africa war zones' 'rape epidemic' " . BBC News. 13 February 2008 . Retrieved 6 January 2010 . ^ McCrummen, Stephanie (9 September 2007). "Prevalence of Rape in E.Congo Described as Worst in World" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 30 April 2014 . ^ a b "Africa Tales of Rape in DR Congo" . BBC News . Retrieved 6 April 2010 . ^ Kira Cochrane (9 May 2008). "Kira Cochrane talks to filmmaker Lisa F Jackson on her documentary about rape in the Congo" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 30 April 2014 . ^ "A Conversation with Eve Ensler: Femicide in the Congo" . PBS. 18 January 2007. Archived from the original on 4 July 2010 . Retrieved 30 April 2014 . ^ Nolen, Stephanie. " "Not Women Anymore": The Congo's rape survivors face pain, shame and AIDS" . Ms. Magazine. Archived from the original on 31 October 2016 . Retrieved 30 April 2014 . ^ "UN has failed Congo mass rape victims, says investigator" , The Guardian , 8 September 2010 ^ "CONFLICT-RELATED SEXUAL VIOLENCE s/2020/487" (PDF) . United Nations. 3 June 2020 . Retrieved 16 October 2022 . ^ "UNICEF adviser says rape in Darfur, Sudan continues with impunity" . 19 October 2004. UN News Centre . ^ Dan Glaister; Julian Borger (13 May 2004). "1,800 new pictures add to US disgust: Stills shown of women forced to bare breasts" .

The Guardian . London . Retrieved 13 July 2011 . ^ SEALEY, GERALDINE (15 July 2004). "Hersh: Children sodomized at Abu Ghraib, on tape" . Salon . Archived from the original on 15 October 2011. ^ Harding, Luke (19 September 2004). "After Abu Ghraib" .

The Guardian . Archived from the original on 28 August 2013. ^ The "Taguba Report" On Treatment Of Abu Ghraib Prisoners In Iraq (Report). p. ARTICLE 15–6 INVESTIGATION OF THE 800th MILITARY POLICE BRIGADE. Archived from the original on 9 October 2004. ^ Harding, Luke (19 May 2004). "The other prisoners" .

The Guardian . ^ a b "ISIS sexual violence is an act of terrorism, says former CIA analyst" . Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. 25 September 2014. ^ Nour Malas, "Ancient Prophecies Motivate Islamic State Militants: Battlefield Strategies Driven by 1,400-year-old Apocalyptic Ideas" , The Wall Street Journal , 18 November 2014. Retrieved 22 November 2014. ^ Amelia Smith, "ISIS Publishes Pamphlet On How to Treat Female Slaves" , Newsweek , 9 December 2014. ^ Greg Botelho, "ISIS: Enslaving, having sex with 'unbelieving' women, girls is OK" , CNN , 13 December 2014. ^ Katharine Lackey, "Pamphlet provides Islamic State guidelines for sex slaves" , USA Today , 13 December 2014. ^ Carey Lodge, "Islamic State issues abhorrent sex slavery guidelines about how to treat women" , Christianity Today , 15 December 2014. ^ Adam Withnall, "Isis releases 'abhorrent' sex slaves pamphlet with 27 tips for militants on taking, punishing and raping female captives" , The Independent , 10 December 2014. ^ Callimachi, Rukmini (13 August 2015). "ISIS Enshrines a Theology of Rape" .

The New York Times . ^ "Libya: Gaddafi investigated over use of rape as weapon" . BBC News. 8 June 2011 . Retrieved 30 April 2014 . ^ a b c "Afghanistan: Harrowing accounts emerge of the Taliban's reign of terror in Kunduz" . Amnesty International. October 2015. ^ "Current peacekeeping operations. United Nations Peacekeeping" . United Nations . Retrieved 30 April 2014 . ^ Defeis (2008) ^ Anna Shotton, "A Strategy to Address Sexual Exploitation by U.N. Peacekeeping Personnel", 39 CORNELL L. REV. 97, 103 (2006). ^ Defeis (2008) , p. 191 ^ Sarah Martin (October 2005). "Must boys be boys? Ending Sexual Exploitation & Abuse in UN Peacekeeping Missions" (PDF) . Refugees International . Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 August 2006. ^ "UN Peacekeepers and Cultures of Violence" . Cultural Survival. 19 March 2010 . Retrieved 30 April 2014 . ^ Novick, Natalie. "When Those Meant to Keep the Peace Commit Sexualized Violence |Women Under Siege Project." Accessed 18 December 2013 ^ "UN peacekeepers took part in rapes during Bosnian Genocide | We Remember the Bosnian Genocide, 1992–95. Mi se Sjećamo Genocida u Bosni, 1992–95" . Bosniagenocide.wordpress.com. 9 December 2010. Archived from the original on 3 December 2013 . Retrieved 30 April 2014 . ^ "The Peacekeeper's Child | Outlook India Magazine" . magazine.outlookindia.com/ . 5 February 2022. ^ "Haiti anger over alleged Uruguay UN rape" . BBC News. 6 September 2011 . Retrieved 30 April 2014 . ^ "U.N. Sexual Abuse Alleged in Congo" .

The Washington Post . 16 December 2004 . Retrieved 30 April 2014 . ^ "U.N. Faces More Accusations of Sexual Misconduct" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 30 April 2014 . ^ "SUDAN: With UN Peacekeepers Accused of Rape in Sudan, UN Women & Ban Ki-Moon Adviser Won't Answer, Other Priorities – News Library & Events" . PeaceWomen. 14 June 2011. Archived from the original on 3 December 2013 . Retrieved 30 April 2014 . ^ "Rape Allegations Faced by U.N.

In South Sudan – The New York Sun" . Nysun.com. 3 January 2007 . Retrieved 30 April 2014 . ^ "UN's Minusma peacekeepers 'raped woman in Mali' " . En.africatime.com. Archived from the original on 3 December 2013 . Retrieved 30 April 2014 . ^ "Another U.N. Peacekeeper Rape Scandal" . Outsidethebeltway.com. 23 July 2007 . Retrieved 30 April 2014 . ^ "Special Reports | Peacekeepers 'abusing children' " . BBC News. 27 May 2008 . Retrieved 30 April 2014 . ^ "Profile: Bureaucrat at Large in the Balkans; Yasushi Akashi, Almost Painfully Diplomatic U.N. Envoy", The Independent , 30 April 1994. ^ "UN-believable – OhmyNews International" . Archived from the original on 10 January 2007. ^ "Bosnia sex trade shames UN" .

The Scotsman . 9 February 2003 . Retrieved 30 April 2014 . ^ Secretary-General, Comprehensive Report Prepared Pursuant to General Assembly Resolution 59/296 on Sexual Exploitation and Sexual Abuse, Including Policy Development, Implementation and Full Justification of Proposed Capacity on Personnel Conduct Issues, 14, delivered to the General Assembly, U.N. Doc. A/60/862 (24 May 2006) ^ Defeis (2008) , p. 192 ^ " 'Survival sex': How NGOs and peacekeepers exploit women in war" . Women Under Siege Project . Retrieved 30 April 2014 . ^ Patten, Pramila (21 January 2021). "United Nations Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila Patten, urges all parties to prohibit the use of sexual violence and cease hostilities in the Tigray region of Ethiopia" . United Nations . Retrieved 1 February 2021 . {{ cite web }} : CS1 maint: url-status ( link ) ^ "Situation Report EEPA HORN No. 73 – 1 February 2021" (PDF) . Europe External Programme with Africa . 31 January 2021. Archived (PDF) from the original on 31 January 2021 . Retrieved 1 February 2021 . ^ "Ethiopia's Tigray crisis: 'I lost my hand when a soldier tried to rape me' " . BBC News . 15 February 2021 . Retrieved 15 February 2021 . {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: url-status ( link ) ^ a b c Mazurana, Dyan; Mekonen, Hayelom K.; Conley, Bridget; de Waal, Alex ; Burns, Delia (10 August 2021). "What 'Rape as a Weapon of War' in Tigray Really Means" . World Peace Foundation . Archived from the original on 27 October 2021 . Retrieved 20 November 2021 . ^ a b "Rape: weapon of war" . 5 June 1993. ^ a b " 'We lay like corpses. Then the raping began': 52 years on, Bangladesh's rape camp survivors speak out | Global development | The Guardian" . amp.theguardian.com . 3 April 2023 . Retrieved 6 August 2024 . ^ Jahan, Rounaq (2004). Genocide in Bangladesh . pp. 8– 9. ^ Lamb, Christina. Our Bodies, Their Battlefields: War Through the Lives of Women . Scribner. ISBN 9781501199172 . ^ Lewin, Miriam; Wornat, Olga. Putas y Guerrilleras . Planeta. ISBN 9789504939344 . ^ "BIRN BiH - Ahmet Makitan Indicted for War Crimes" . www.bim.ba . Archived from the original on 22 July 2011 . Retrieved 28 November 2025 . ^ Allen, Beverly (1996). Rape Warfare: The Hidden Genocide in Bosnia-Herzegovina and Croatia . University of Minnesota Press. ISBN 978-0-8166-2818-6 . ^ "Report of the Special Rapporteur on systematic rape" . Archived from the original on 17 November 2001 . Retrieved 23 September 2014 . ^ Hassan, Nihal (2007). "50,000 Iraqi Refugees forced into prostitution" .

The Journal of Military History . 82 (4): 1199– 1230. Yoshimi, Yoshiaki (2000). Comfort women : sexual slavery in the Japanese military during World War II . New York: Columbia University Press. ISBN 9780231120326 . Heineman, Elizabeth (2011). Sexual violence in conflict zones: from the ancient world to the era of human rights . Pennsylvania: University of Pennsylvania Press. ISBN 9780812243185 . Sherwill, Ambrose (2007). A fair and Honest Book . Lulu. ISBN 978-1847531490 . Le Tissier, Richard (2006). Island Destiny: A True Story of Love and War in the Channel Island of Sark . Seaflower Books. ISBN 978-1903341360 . Snyder, David Raub (2007). Sex Crimes Under the Wehrmacht . University of Nebraska Press. ISBN 978-0-8032-0742-4 . Tomasevich, Jozo (2002). War and Revolution in Yugoslavia, 1941-1945: Occupation and Collaboration . Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0804736152 . Mazower, Mark (1993). Inside Hitler's Greece: The Experience of Occupation, 1941–44 . New Haven: Yale University Press. ISBN 0300089236 . Ericsson, Kjersti (2015). Women in War: Examples from Norway and Beyond . Routledge. ISBN 978-1138550162 . Schrijvers, Peter (2005).

The Unknown Dead: Civilians in the Battle of the Bulge (PDF) . University Press of Kentucky. ISBN 978-0-674-02577-6 . Beevor, Antony (2015). Ardennes 1944: Hitler's Last Gamble . London: Viking. ISBN 978-0-670-91864-5 . Blussé, Leonard; Everts, Natalie, eds. (2000).

The Formosan Encounter: Notes on Formosa's Aboriginal Society: A Selection of Documents from Dutch Archival Sources . Vol. II. Shung Ye Museum of Formosan Aborigines. ISBN 9579976775 . Everts, Natalie (2000). "Jacob Lamay van Taywan: An Indigenous Formosan Who Became an Amsterdam Citizen".

The Political Psychology of War Rape: Studies from Bosnia and Herzegovina . Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-67117-0 . Lewis, Dustin A. (23 July 2009). "Unrecognized Victims: Sexual Violence Against Men in Conflict Settings Under International Law". Wisconsin International Law Journal . 27 (1): 1– 49. SSRN 1404574 . "IHL Primer on Sexual Violence" . International Humanitarian Law Research Initiative, June 2009. Kevin Gerard Neill. "Duty, Honor, Rape: Sexual Assault Against Women During War" . Journal of International Women's Studies . Kathryn Farr. "Extreme War Rape in Today's Civil-war-torn States" . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Sociological Association , New York City, 11 August 2007. Roberts, Mary Louise (2013). What Soldiers Do: Sex and the American GI in World War II France . University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-92309-3 . Our Bodies, Their Battlefield: What War Does to Women (London: William Collins, 2020. ISBN 978-0-00-830000-5 ) The War Crime No One Wants to Talk About" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 25 September 2020.