A short history of medicine

ANCIENT GREECE

(TO ABOUT 300 B.C.)


§ 1. _Origins of Greek Medicine._

Scientific Medicine began with the Greeks. The Greeks not only started
scientific Medicine upon its course, but also provided the substantial
basic elements of our anatomy, physiology and pathology, and above
all, perhaps, our conception of the bodily ‘constitution’, ‘habit’ or
‘temperament’. It is from the Greeks that we derive almost all our
medical nomenclature. When to this we add that our medical traditions
are inherited through a direct and continuous chain from the Greek
practitioners, it becomes evident that the debt that Medicine owes to
this marvellous people is great indeed.

Now this debt has become associated with two or three great figures.
The names Hippocrates, Aristotle, Galen, are familiar to all. Yet it is
not always recognized that these men were but the representatives of a
widely extended and long-lasting system. Greek Medicine was, in fact,
like modern Medicine, the result of centuries of carefully recorded,
collated and progressive research. Greek Medicine first assumed a
scientific aspect with the Ionian and Italo-Greek philosophers at the
very beginning of the sixth century B.C. It continued to make important
advances until the death of Galen at the very end of the second century
of the Christian era. Thus the life-span of progressive and scientific
Medicine among the Greeks was no less than eight hundred years. With
the most tolerant use of the words ‘scientific’ and ‘progressive’,
we can hardly place the beginnings of modern Medicine in Europe
before the end of the fifteenth century. Thus our own system has only
been developing its characteristic features for some four and a half
centuries, which is but little more than half the course that Greek
science ran.

It is evident, therefore, that we may have much to learn from the
Greeks, not indeed in matters of actual fact or observation--for nearly
all that is _directly_ useful in their writings has been absorbed long
ago into our medical literature--but in spirit and method. From a
study of the character and course of Greek medical science we can gain
hints of the snares and pitfalls and catastrophes into which the Art
of Medicine may at times be led. Further, by study of the practice of
Medicine under conditions so different from ours, we learn something
of what is truly permanent in the Art of Healing. Lastly, by tracing
the growth of the Science of Medicine, as it arose among the Greeks and
as it died in the hands of their less worthy descendants, we may take
alike example and warning. We may learn to distinguish the healthy and
vigorous growth of a science from the stunted and deformed products
that are often acclaimed, even in our own times, as Wisdom’s final word
to Man.

It has been said that, ‘save the blind forces of Nature, nothing lives
or moves which is not Greek in origin’. The saying needs modification,
for there is a thing which still lives and moves that is not Greek in
origin, a blind force which is not a blind force of Nature. It is the
force of Superstition, of that age-old belief that Nature will give
us something for nothing, which is expressed by the word ‘Magic’.
The Greeks were no more free from that contemptible fallacy than
are the men of our own days. But the greatest of the Greeks stood
wholly above such folly, and we can watch the Greek mind gradually
lifting itself from that primeval mental attitude which is older than
any known culture, older perhaps than any known race, the attitude
of Nature-Worship, or ‘Animism’. To give an idea of how the ‘sweet
reasonableness’ of the Greek mind gradually dissipated the animistic
fog, a few words must be said about the history of the Greeks. Without
that amount of history it would seem a miracle that Man ever became
reasonable at all.

The Medicine we call Greek might be described as the system which
prevailed in ancient times in that half of the Mediterranean area which
lies east and south of the Italian Peninsula.

Up to about 1000 B.C. most of the coast-lands of this Mediterranean
area were inhabited by that very remarkable people, the Minoans.
These have left some extraordinary remains, the full significance
of which has not yet been revealed. The general development of the
Minoan civilization has, however, been clearly outlined by modern
archaeological investigation. This has resulted in an entirely new
interpretation of the story which Homer tells in the _Iliad_. The siege
of Troy represents an attack by the invading Greeks on one of the last
Minoan strongholds. About 1000 B.C. the whole Eastern Mediterranean
basin was being overrun by the Greek tribes coming in from the north.
These Greeks were no pure race, but a mixed multitude of invaders
who came along several lines of advance. As always happens in such
invasions, the conquered were not exterminated, but mingled with the
invaders. Thus the Greeks, as they advanced, absorbed much of the
culture and outlook of the civilization that they submerged.

In considering the history of Rational Medicine we are concerned
chiefly with two main invading streams of Greek tribes: that of the
Dorians, who passed towards Crete and towards the Island of Cos and the
opposite peninsula of Cnidus, and that of the Ionians, who colonized
most of the remaining part of western Asia Minor. These two peoples
were, between them, responsible for the main intellectual output of the
Greeks of those early days. The medical system which they initiated
first took shape in western Asia Minor, and thence became diffused over
the whole of the Greek world. The Greek system of Medicine which thus
arose in Asia Minor had various roots, as indeed the Medicine of a
mixed people, living under very complex social conditions, was bound to
have.

Firstly, there was the submerged civilization of the conquered Minoan
folk. It is probable that the cult of the serpent--so constantly
associated with Aesculapius and still used as a medical emblem--was of
Minoan origin, for the serpent was a symbol much used in the Minoan
religion (Fig. 2). It is probable too that some of the hygienic ideas
of the Greeks were derived from the same source, for the Minoans had an
excellent system of drainage. We can, however, say little on this head
because the interpretation of the Minoan records is still hidden from
us.



Secondly, we have to remember that the shores of Asia Minor lie on the
outskirts of the great civilization which had grown up in the valley
of the Tigris and the Euphrates. The Greeks drew from that source much
of their more superstitious beliefs, as well as some, at least, of
their scientific method. On the one hand, the demoniac theories that
bulk so largely in later Greek medicine doubtless came from Assyria
and Babylonia. The Medicine of the New Testament, for instance, with
its casting out of devils, is of Mesopotamian origin. But, on the
other hand, the Mesopotamian peoples had for long ages laid up a great
treasury of observation, notably of astronomical data which were
often applied to astrological ends. There was also some knowledge of
anatomy derived from the entrails of animals used in divination (Fig.
4). Working on the basis of these records, the Greeks were able to
erect a scientific method which appears as a prominent feature in
their intellectual life in later centuries. Moreover, there was in
Mesopotamia a standardization of both medical and surgical procedure
which the nimble-witted Greeks were quick to adopt (Fig. 3). On its
lower and less intelligent side, however, the Mesopotamian material was
made to minister to Greek superstition and especially to astrological
belief.



Thirdly, to the Egyptian civilization the Greek debt was also
considerable. Many drugs were derived from Egypt and others were
suggested by Egyptian practice. The basis of Greek medical ethics,
too, can be traced to Egypt. Some of the practical devices of Greek
Medicine, such as the forms of the surgical instruments, were of
Egyptian origin. Nor can we neglect the statement made by the Greeks
themselves, that mathematical knowledge--the test and index of all
scientific growth--came to them first from Egypt. Lastly, we note that
the Egyptians deified a physician, Imhotep (Fig. 5), in exactly the
way that the Greeks deified their physician Aesculapius (Fig. 6). Both
Imhotep and Aesculapius were, in fact, historic personages, and their
evolution into gods presents many interesting parallels.



The Greeks of western Asia Minor, thus drawing material from many
sources, came to develop, towards the end of the seventh century B.C.,
a philosophical system from which the whole of their Science may be
said to be a natural growth. Factors in this development were the
medical schools of Cos, where Hippocrates was born, and of the opposite
peninsula, Cnidus. These schools were in active operation by the sixth
century B.C. By the middle of the fifth century they were important
elements in the growing complexity of Greek life. Much of the so-called
_Hippocratic Collection_, which contains the earliest Greek medical
writings that have survived, must have been put together somewhere in
the fourth century B.C., though its final recension is certainly later
(Fig. 7). In that final recension Persian and Indian elements were also
included, though to what degree is still very uncertain.



But the picture of the development of Greek Medicine is not yet
complete. Although we inherit the scientific spirit from the Greeks,
and although they set a standard for all time of the purest and
most disinterested type of medical practice, they are also in part
responsible for some of the basest forms of medical jugglery that have
afflicted and still afflict mankind. The medicine of the physicians was
only one of their medical systems. There was a far lower form which
gradually passed into the hands of the priests. The temple jugglery of
Greece is ancestor, both by imitation and by direct tradition, of much
medieval and modern medical miracle-mongering.

Furthermore, in ancient as in modern times, all medical men were not
equally pure in aim or scientific in method. The practice of some Greek
physicians was more than flavored with magic. In justice, also, it
must be said that not all priests were mere charlatans, and that there
are traces of scientific method in the treatment of patients in the
temples. There was, indeed, a relation between the practice of some
of the physicians among the Greeks and that of some of their priestly
magicians. We shall not attempt to determine the actual extent and
nature of this relationship. For our purpose it is enough that the two
systems were quite distinct in their most typical developments.

The temple system of Greek Medicine was associated from an early date
with a deity, Asklepios, or, to give him his better-known Latin name,
Aesculapius. Numerous representations of him have come down to us, and
in them we see him gradually molded to a particular type. He becomes at
last an aged man of noble, benevolent and dreamy aspect, holding in
his hand a staff around which a serpent twines (Fig. 6). The cult of
the god Aesculapius was carried on at numerous sites. The best known,
both from literature and excavation, is Epidaurus. The conditions there
are typical of those in other Aesculapian centers.

Epidaurus is about thirty miles from Athens. It lies between two
considerable ranges of hills, and the country bears still, in its
customs and place-names, some remnants of the ancient cult. One
tradition tells that a certain maiden, Koronis, being with child by
Apollo, brought forth the infant Aesculapius on the mountain above
Epidaurus. There is still a village named Koroni hard by. She fled
to conceal her shame and left the child on the mountain, where it
was tended by a goat and watched over by a dog. The infant performed
various miracles which we need not pursue, though the temple arose on
the site where he is said to have wrought them. One of his miracles,
however, has a wider interest and is worth recounting. A certain
Hippolytus, falsely accused of impure relations with his stepmother,
was slain by the gods in answer to the curses of his father, Theseus.
Raised from the dead by the wonder-working Aesculapius, he reappears in
legend at the Arician grove in Italy. ‘There’, says a Greek chronicler
of the second century A.D., ‘he became a king and devoted a precinct
to Artemis, where, down to my time, the prize for the victor in single
combat was the priesthood of the goddess. The contest was open to no
freeman, but only to runaway slaves.’

The son slain by his father and then rising from the dead; the runaway
slave seeking sanctuary with Artemis in her grove, allowed his liberty
and elevated to the priesthood there; the priesthood held only so long
as the priest can guard it in mortal combat against the next runaway
slave; this succession of slave kings and priestly murders has touched
the imagination of the poets and artists in ancient and in modern
times. The sacred grove of Artemis stood by the side of the lake of
Nemi:

    The still glassy lake that sleeps
    Beneath Aricia’s trees--
    Those trees in whose dim shadow
    The ghastly priest doth reign,
    The priest who slew the slayer
    And shall himself be slain.

It is a picture utterly out of accord with the general trend of
classical mythology. Long ago scholars saw therein a remnant of a
submerged faith, that ancient ‘Nature worship’ which survived among the
Greeks, and survives with us. From this incident is named the great
classical work of Anthropology, _The Golden Bough_. By this story and
by all that it implies, by all that learning has drawn out of it and
associated with it, the history of Medicine comes into contact with the
brooding spirit of savage man. Into that dark realm we shall not enter
in this volume.

History is the tale of the spirit of Man unfolding itself. This process
is always slow, often imperceptible, sometimes retrograde, yet over
long periods of time it is sure. Where no evolution of the spirit can
be traced true history cannot be written, wherefore no man can write a
history of human folly. Irrational man, driven by disease and fear of
death, exhibits the same follies in all ages. The medical follies and
superstitions of our own days are as in those when Aesculapius claimed
men’s allegiance. His garments and his names are changed, his temples
are transformed, his priests assume other titles, but his face is the
same, and he works the same wonders with about the same frequency. It
is of Rational Medicine that we have henceforth to speak.


§ 2. _The Hippocratic Physician._

We turn to the other side of the picture. Nothing could be in greater
contrast to the orgies of the savage, the dark ways of the magician,
or the charlatanry of the priests, than the serene spirit of wisdom
which pervades the best Greek Medicine. The finest presentation of that
system is to be found in a group of about a hundred works that have
been associated together since antiquity under the name of Hippocrates.
It is known as the _Hippocratic Collection_.

It will naturally be asked, ‘Which of these works is by the man whose
name they bear?’ To that question, alas, no definite answer can be
given. There is no single work which we can state with certainty to
be the composition of the Father of Medicine. The books of which the
_Collection_ is composed are the work of a number of authors, belonging
to different schools, holding various and often contradictory views,
living in widely separated parts of the Greek world and writing at
dates divided from each other, in the most extreme cases, by perhaps
five or six centuries. Of the finest books of this collection we can
but say that they contain nothing inconsistent with a Hippocratic
origin, that their ethical standpoint is in accord with the Hippocratic
ideal, and that they are the work of physicians of great intellectual
power and experience.

If we ask what is known about Hippocrates himself, and if we seek
information rather than entertainment, our answer will be almost as
meager. Hippocrates is no mythical figure, for he is mentioned with
high respect by his younger contemporary, Plato. He was the son of a
physician, and was born at Cos about 460 B.C. The most active period
of his life thus began about 420 B.C. His death is placed between 377
and 359--the latter would make him 101, an appropriate age for a great
physician. He led a wandering life, and is heard of at Cos, Thasos,
Athens, in Thrace and elsewhere, and lastly in Thessaly, where his
grave was long shown. Among his pupils were his two sons, and his
son-in-law. Of the work of the latter we have a fragment preserved both
by Aristotle and in the _Hippocratic Collection_ itself.

That is all that is known about the Father of Medicine. We have not
even his portrait. Yet we have something far better; we have an
idealized representation of what the Greek would wish his physician
to be. It is a noble bust to which the name of Hippocrates was early
attached. Many copies exist (see Frontispiece). The calm, righteous
and dignified presence which it portrays has stamped itself on the
consciousness and conscience of those who follow the Art of Healing. To
that gracious figure the medical man will continue to pay homage.

If critical examination has dealt thus hardly with the Hippocratic
writings and with Hippocrates himself, what has been left which we
may surely derive from the Greek medical system? The answer is that
Medicine has from the Greeks two great things: the picture of a man and
the institution of a method.

The man is Hippocrates himself. His figure, gaining in dignity what it
loses in clearness, stands for all time as that of the ideal physician,
for the ideal is there and is clearly set forth in these great
writings, whether we discern the details of his earthly features or no.
Calm and effective, humane and observant, prompt and cautious, at once
learned and willing to learn, eager alike to get and give knowledge,
unmoved save by the fear lest his knowledge may fail to benefit
others--both the sick and their servants the physicians,--incorruptible
and pure in mind and body, the figure of the greatest of physicians has
gained, not lost, by time. In all ages he has been held by medical men
in a reverence comparable only to that which has been felt towards the
founders of the great religions by their followers. The figure of the
Hippocratic physician has been of incalculable spiritual value to the
medical profession in the twenty-three centuries that have passed since
his death.

So much for the man. We turn now to the method.

The _method_ of Hippocratic medicine is that known to-day as the
_experimental_ or better _experiential_. It was employed among the
Greeks for centuries after the death of Hippocrates. Then came a
time when a social and philosophical upheaval prevented its further
prosecution. For the thousand years that followed the break-up of the
Roman Empire the medical practice of Europe was at best a corrupted
imitation and misunderstanding of the Hippocratic teaching; at worst
it descended to a low level of Animism and Magic. Then there was a
rally. Slowly--very slowly at first--the foundations of Modern Science
were laboriously laid. Among the first elements in this scientific
Renaissance was the recovery of the Hippocratic works.

In the centuries that followed this Renaissance the very words of the
_Hippocratic Collection_ were taught in the medical schools in a spirit
that was anything but that of Hippocrates. Gradually, however, a better
understanding crept into men’s minds. The spirit of those writings and
their methods and observations came now rightly to be exalted above
the works themselves. The works themselves were wisely dropped from
the medical curriculum. They are no longer used in any medical school.
But if we turn again to contemplate the Hippocratic treatises, we may
recognize in them the modern process of careful record of data and
cautious inference from them--that collation of experience from various
sources obtained by various methods with which we are now so familiar.
We may even see in full force the actual process of case-taking, bed
side instruction and clinical lecture. These methods are practised
much in the way in which we know them, and are set forth with a
conciseness and beauty of language and a loftiness of ethical tone
which have not since been surpassed. To such a collection medical men
must always return. No part of it is more impressive than the so-called
_Hippocratic Oath_.



To the right sits a patient awaiting his turn to interview the
physician. His left arm is bandaged. Behind this patient stands a
figure smelling a flower as a preventive against infection. Behind the
physician stands a man wounded in the left leg, which is bandaged.
Back to back to this last figure is a dwarf with a disproportionately
large head. His body exhibits deformities typical of the developmental
disease now known as _Achondroplasia_. In addition to his other
deformities, we note that his muscular body is hairy, and that the
bridge of his nose is sunken. On his back he carries a hare which is
almost as tall as himself. Talking to the dwarf is a man leaning on a
long staff, who has the remains of a bandage round his chest.]

The _Hippocratic Oath_, in its present form, is of very much later date
than Hippocrates. Yet parts of it may be even earlier than he, and
some suggestion of the Oath is, perhaps, to be seen in the contents of
Egyptian papyri of the second millennium B.C. It need hardly be said
that the late date of the _Oath_ by no means removes the interest of
this grand ethical monument. No passage better reflects the spirit of
the Hippocratic physicians. The oath is clearly designed for a youth
entering on his apprenticeship to such a one.

    ‘I swear by Apollo the healer, invoking all the gods and
    goddesses to be my witnesses, that I will fulfil this Oath and
    this written Covenant to the best of my ability and judgement.

    ‘I will look upon him who shall have taught me this Art even as
    one of my own parents. I will share my substance with him, and
    I will supply his necessities, if he be in need. I will regard
    his offspring even as my own brethren, and I will teach them
    this Art, if they would learn it, without fee or covenant. I
    will impart this Art by precept, by lecture and by every mode
    of teaching, not only to my own sons but to the sons of him who
    has taught me, and to disciples bound by covenant and oath,
    according to the Law of Medicine.

    ‘The regimen I adopt shall be for the benefit of the patients
    according to my ability and judgement, and not for their hurt
    or for any wrong. I will give no deadly drug to any, though
    it be asked of me, nor will I counsel such, and especially I
    will not aid a woman to procure abortion. Whatsoever house I
    enter, there will I go for the benefit of the sick, refraining
    from all wrongdoing or corruption, and especially from any act
    of seduction, of male or female, of bond or free. Whatsoever
    things I see or hear concerning the life of men, in my
    attendance on the sick or even apart therefrom, which ought not
    to be noised abroad, I will keep silence thereon, counting such
    things to be as sacred secrets. Pure and holy will I keep my
    Life and my Art.

    ‘If I fulfil this Oath and confound it not, be it mine to enjoy
    Life and Art alike, with good repute among all men at all
    times. If I transgress and violate my oath, may the reverse be
    my lot.’


§ 3. _Hippocratic Practice._

Among the most remarkable features of the _Hippocratic Collection_ is
the feeling of contact with the patient which most of its works convey.
This is naturally a special characteristic of the surgical works. One
treatise, which bears the title _On wounds of the head_, has always
drawn attention as bespeaking especial ingenuity and experience. The
description of trephining is of peculiar interest, because the practice
was known in prehistoric times and is still employed by savage and
semi-civilized peoples. The process recommended for cases of fracture
of the skull and injury to the underlying structures resembles, in
many details, the modern surgical procedure.

    ‘When it is necessary to trephine a patient, make up your
    mind and judge as follows. If you have had charge of the case
    from the first, do not trephine the bone down to the membrane
    at once, for it is not desirable that the membrane be long
    exposed, lest it end by becoming rotten and fungous. There is
    also another danger, to wit that you wound the membrane with
    the saw during the operation, if you try to remove the bone by
    trephining immediately down to the membrane. Therefore, when
    the bone is almost sawn through and is already loose, cease
    trephining and allow the bone to come away of itself. While
    trephining, often remove the instrument and dip it in cold
    water. If you do not do this, the trephine, becoming heated by
    the circular motion and heating and drying the bone, may burn
    it and cause an unduly large piece of the bone round the sawing
    to come away.’



So much for a normal case which comes to the physician’s hands directly
after the accident. But in less fortunate cases he is not called in so
early, and the wound suppurates before he can bring his Art to bear
upon it. In such a case he is advised:

    ‘Saw the bone immediately to the membrane with a serrated
    trephine (Fig. 9, _a_ and _c_), frequently removing the
    trephine and testing with the probe all round along the track,
    for the bone is sawn through much more quickly if it is already
    suppurating and penetrated by the pus. The bone, however, often
    happens to be thin in places. Therefore be on your guard not to
    apply the trephine at random, but fix it in the bone where it
    appears thickest, frequently making an examination and trying
    to raise the bone by moving it. And after removing it, continue
    such treatment as may appear advantageous to the wound,
    according to circumstances.’

Among the works of the _Hippocratic Collection_ is a lecture note-book
known by the title _Concerning the things in the Surgery_. It is
written in very abbreviated style and consists of mere headings.
Nevertheless, our attention is arrested by its startling modernness,
when we read such a category as this:

    ‘Operative requisites in the surgery: the patient; the
    operator; assistants; instruments; the light, where and how
    placed; the patient’s person and apparatus. The operator,
    whether seated or standing, should be placed conveniently to
    the part being operated upon and to the light. Each of the two
    kinds of light, ordinary or artificial, may be used in two
    ways, direct or oblique.’

Or again, such details as:

    ‘The nails [of the operator] neither to exceed nor come short
    of the finger-tips. Practise using the finger-ends. Practise
    all operations with each hand and with both together, your
    object being to attain ability, speed, painlessness, elegance
    and readiness. Let those who look after the patient present the
    part for operation as you want it, and hold fast the rest of
    the body so as to be all steady, keeping silence and obeying
    their superior.’

Are we not here reminded of an up-to-date operator and operating
theater?

In the _Hippocratic Collection_ the physician attends cases of every
type, and does not refuse to do his best for a case because the use
of an instrument is demanded. He is thus no ‘specialist’. But the
mass of his practice lay with cases to which instrumental treatment
was inapplicable. In cases in which surgical intervention was not
justified the Hippocratic physician adopted for the most part what is
called an ‘expectant’ line of treatment. Realizing that, in general,
the tendency of the body is to recover, he contented himself with
‘waiting on Nature’. This does not by any means imply that he was
helpless, for much could be done by nursing, regimen and diet to aid
the patient in that conflict which he alone must fight out. For the
conduct of that great battle wise and useful directions are recorded.
But believing in _the healing power of Nature_--the famous phrase is
used in the Hippocratic writings--the physician was none too eager to
administer drugs. In the state of knowledge of the day this reluctance
was well-judged. Nevertheless the Hippocratic drugs, though neither
numerous nor complex, were some of them very efficient, and their
judicious if reluctant use at the right juncture saved many a life.

_The Aphorisms_ is the most famous book with which the name of
Hippocrates is associated, and is as likely as any of the Collection
to be by Hippocrates himself. It consists of a series of very brief
generalizations. Many of these have been confirmed by the clinical
experience of later ages. Some have passed into medical commonplaces,
others have become popular proverbs. The style of the work suggests an
aged physician reflecting on the experience of a lifetime. Among modern
medical writings its closest analogue is perhaps the _Commentaries_ of
the great English physician, William Heberden the elder (1710-1801),
which was commenced by him after the age of seventy, occupied the last
twenty years of his life, contained a summary of the whole of his
vast experience, and was published by his son after his death. If the
_Aphorisms_ is similarly a work of the old age of Hippocrates it may be
dated about 380 B.C. A few extracts give a good idea of the nature of
the book.

    ‘Life is short and Art is long; the Crisis is fleeting,
    Experiment risky, Decision difficult. Not only must the
    physician be ready to do his duty, but the patient, the
    attendants, the external circumstances must conduce to the
    cure.’

    ‘Old persons bear fasting most readily, next adults, and young
    people yet less; least of all children, and of these least
    again those who are particularly lively.’

    ‘If in any illness sleep does harm, it is a symptom of deadly
    import.’

    ‘When sleep puts an end to delirium, it is a good sign.’

    ‘Weariness without cause indicates disease.’

    ‘If there be a painful affection in any part of the body, and
    yet no suffering, there is mental disorder.’

    ‘To eat heartily after a long illness without putting on flesh
    is a bad portent.’

    ‘Food or drink slightly inferior in itself, but more pleasant,
    should be preferred to that better itself, but less pleasant.’

    ‘The old have fewer illnesses than the young, but if any become
    chronic with them they generally carry it with them to the
    grave.’

    ‘Those naturally very fat are more liable to sudden death than
    the thin.’

    ‘The dry seasons are more healthy than the rainy, and attended
    by less mortality.’

    ‘Cold sweats in conjunction with an acute fever indicate death,
    but with a milder fever only prolonged sickness.’

    ‘Convulsions supervening on a wound are deadly.’ (Tetanus, cp.
    p. 267.)

    ‘Those attacked by tetanus either die within four days, or if
    they get through these they recover’ (compare pp. 257 and 267).

    ‘Phthisis comes on mostly from eighteen to thirty-five years of
    age.’

    ‘It is fatal for a woman in pregnancy to be attacked by one of
    the acute diseases.’

    ‘In cases of jaundice, hardening of the liver is a bad sign.’

    ‘We should observe the appearance of the eyes in sleep. If any
    of the white show through the eyelids when closing, this is a
    bad sign and very dangerous, unless it be due to diarrhoea or
    taking a purgative.’

    ‘An attack of delirium with laughter is less dangerous than
    with despondency.’

    ‘Apoplexy is commonest between the ages of forty and sixty.’

    ‘If you give the same nutriment to a patient in a fever and to
    a person in health, the patient’s disease is aggravated by what
    adds strength to the healthy man.’

The chief clinical achievement of the _Hippocratic Collection_ lies
in the descriptions of actual cases. These descriptions are not only
without parallel during nearly 2,000 years, but they are models of
what succinct clinical records should be. They are clear and short,
they give all the leading features and yet they show no attempt to
prejudge the importance of any particular feature. The records of
these cases illustrate the Greek genius for seizing the essential. The
writer does not betray the least wish to exalt his own skill. He seeks
merely to put the data before the reader for his guidance under like
circumstances. It is a reflex of the spirit of honesty in which these
men worked that in the great majority of the cases they record death
ensued. Two of these remarkable descriptions may be given:

    ‘The woman with quinsy, who lodged with Aristion; her
    complaint began in the tongue; voice inarticulate; tongue
    red and parched. _First day_, shivered, then became heated.
    _Third day_, rigor, acute fever; reddish and hard swelling
    on both sides of neck and chest; extremities cold and livid;
    respiration elevated; drink returned by the nose; she could
    not swallow; alvine and urinary discharges suppressed. _Fourth
    day_, all symptoms exacerbated. _Fifth day_, died.’

This was a case of Diphtheria. The quinsy, the paralysis of the palate
leading to return of the food through the nose, and the difficulty
with speech and swallowing are typical results of this affection which
was here complicated by a spread of the septic processes into the neck
and chest, a not uncommon event in the disease. The rapid onset of the
conditions is rather unusual, but may be explained if we regard the
case as a mild and unnoticed diphtheria, subsequently complicated by
paralysis and by secondary septic infection, for which reason she came
under observation.

    ‘In Thasos, the wife of Delearces, who lodged on the plain,
    through sorrow was seized with an acute and shivering fever.
    From first to last she always wrapped herself up in her
    bedclothes; kept silent, fumbled, picked, bored, and gathered
    hairs [from the clothes]; tears and again laughter; no sleep;
    bowels irritable but passed nothing; when urged drank a
    little; urine thin and scanty; to the touch the fever was
    slight; coldness of the extremities. _Ninth day_, talked
    much incoherently, and again sank into silence. _Fourteenth
    day_, breathing rare, large and spaced, and again hurried.
    _Seventeenth day_, after stimulation of the bowels she passed
    even drinks, nor could retain anything; totally insensible;
    skin parched and tense. _Twentieth day_, much talk, and
    again became composed, then voiceless; respiration hurried.
    _Twenty-first day_, died. Her respiration throughout was rare
    and large; she was totally insensible; always wrapped up in her
    bedclothes; throughout either much talk, or complete silence.’

We have here a description of low muttering delirium, a common end of
continued fevers, as, for instance, Typhoid. It resembles the condition
known to physicians as the ‘typhoid state’. Incidentally the case
contains a reference to a type of breathing common among the dying. The
respiration becomes deep and slow, as it sinks gradually into quietude
and becomes rarer and rarer until it seems to cease altogether, and
then it slowly becomes more rapid and so on alternately. This type of
breathing is known to physicians as ‘Cheyne-Stokes’ respiration, in
commemoration of two distinguished Irish physicians of the last century
who brought it to the attention of medical men. In our own time it has
been partially explained on a physiological basis.

We may note that there is another and even better pen-picture of
Cheyne-Stokes respiration in the _Hippocratic Collection_. We read
of one ‘Philescos who lived by the wall and who took to his bed on
the first day of acute fever.’ About the middle of the sixth day he
died, and the physician notes that ‘the respiration throughout was
_like that of a person recollecting himself_ and was large and rare’.
Cheyne-Stokes breathing is admirably described as ‘that of a person
recollecting himself’.

Immense and, as some may think, overwhelming importance is laid by the
Hippocratic writings upon the art of ‘Prognosis’, that is of predicting
the course which the disease will take. The work to which the title
_Prognostics_ is attached represents a very lofty standard of practice.
We quote from it a description of the signs of death to which the
name of _Hippocratic facies_ has become attached. It is imitated by
Shakespeare in his description of the death of Falstaff in Henry V
(_Act II, Scene 3_).

    ‘You should observe thus in acute diseases; first the
    countenance of the patient, if it be like those of persons
    in health, and especially if it be like itself, for this is
    best of all. But the opposite are the worst, such as these:
    a sharp nose, hollow eyes, collapsed temples; the ears cold,
    contracted, and their lobes turned out; the skin about the
    forehead rough, stretched and parched; the colour of the face
    greenish, dusky, livid or leaden.

    ‘If the countenance be such at the beginning of the disease,
    and if this cannot be accounted for by the symptoms, inquiry
    must be made whether the patient has been sleepless, whether
    his bowels have been very loose, or whether he has wanted food.
    If any of these be confessed, the danger is to be reckoned so
    far the less, and it will become obvious in a day and night
    whether or no the appearance come of these. But if no such
    cause exist and if the symptoms do not subside in this time, be
    it known for certain that the end is at hand.’

These glimpses will give some idea of Rational Medicine in the making.
In the fourth century B.C. Medicine emerges as a definite part of the
scientific consciousness. Rational Medicine is now in being.


§ 4. _Aristotle._

During the fourth century B.C. there lived and worked one whose thought
has stamped itself on the whole subsequent course of the biological and
medical sciences, and indeed of all Science.

Aristotle (384-322 B.C.) was a provincial Greek and son of a Macedonian
physician. At seventeen he became a pupil of Plato at Athens. After
Plato’s death in 347 Aristotle crossed the Aegean to reside in Asia
Minor. The main part of his biological observations was made during
his stay there. In 342 B.C., at the request of King Philip of Macedon,
Aristotle became tutor to Philip’s son, Alexander the Great. He
remained in Macedon for seven years. About 336, when Alexander departed
for the invasion of Asia, Aristotle returned to Athens, where he taught
for the rest of his life. He died in 322 B.C., a few months after his
pupil Alexander.

Aristotle was the great codifier of ancient Science. On him all
subsequent biological development, including that of modern times,
is surely based. In his wonderful biological works, which are still
read by naturalists, he discusses many problems current to this very
day. He laid the basis of the doctrine of Organic Evolution in his
teaching concerning the _Scala Naturae_ ‘Ladder of Nature’ (Fig. 10).
He developed coherent theories of Generation and Heredity. He founded
Comparative Anatomy and he dissected many animals. He did not, however,
anatomize the human body.



Aristotle gave good descriptions of some organs, regarded from the
standpoint of Comparative Anatomy. These descriptions he sometimes
illustrated by drawings,

the first anatomical figures of which we have a record. In some cases
these drawings can be restored with confidence. Thus, he gave an
account of the uterus, the nomenclature of which has been retained in
more or less modified form to our own time (Fig. 11). Among the best
anatomical descriptions given by Aristotle is that of the ruminant
stomach. Perhaps his most extraordinary anatomical feat is his account
of the development of the dogfish _Mustelus laevis_, which he showed
was attached to its mother’s womb in a way very similar to the embryo
of a mammal (Fig. 12). This raised the admiration of the greatest
modern morphologist, Johannes Müller (1807-58, pp. 211-13), and would
in itself be sufficient to establish the claim of Aristotle to a place
in the front rank of observing naturalists. Aristotle gave fairly
accurate descriptions of the branches of the great veins and of
the superficial vessels of the arm of mammals. He realized that the
arteries are usually accompanied by veins. He described the generative
and digestive organs of cephalopod Molluscs, and many other parts of
many other animals.



Something should be said of the errors of Aristotle. Though an
excellent Naturalist, he was in general much weaker in Physiology.
Thus, he made no proper distinction between arteries and veins. He
failed to trace any adequate relations between the sense organs, the
nerves, and the brain. His refusal to attach great importance to
the brain is remarkable. Primacy he placed with the heart, which he
regarded also as the seat of the intelligence. This was contrary not
only to the medical opinion of his day, but also to the popular view,
voiced, for instance, by Aristophanes in his play _The Clouds_, written
about 400 B.C., where we read of a man who had _concussion of the
brain_. Moreover, Aristotle’s teacher Plato placed the seat of thought
and feeling in the brain. From all we know of Aristotle, it seems
probable that he did not take up this attitude without evidence. It
seems likely that he had experimented on the brain and found it devoid
of sensation. Hence his view, opposed to current belief, that it is
not associated with thought. Aristotle regarded the brain simply as an
agent for cooling the heart, and preventing it from being over-heated.
This cooling process, he considered, was effected by the secretion of
_phlegm_ (_pituita_), an idea still preserved in our anatomical term
the _pituitary body_.

The views of Aristotle have had a vast influence in determining
the direction of medical thought. For more than two thousand years
Aristotelian philosophy, in more or less corrupted form, constituted
the main intellectual food of mankind. Without some knowledge of the
biological verdicts of Aristotle, it is impossible to understand the
course taken by Rational Medicine. The influence of Aristotle is
specially evident in certain basic biological conceptions.

The problem of the nature of Generation is one in which Aristotle
never ceased to take an interest. Among the methods by which he sought
to solve it was embryological investigation. His most important
embryological researches were made upon the chick. His choice was most
fortunate, and the chick has remained, to this day, the classical
subject of embryological research. Aristotle asserts that the first
signs of life in the hen’s egg are noticeable on the third day, the
heart being visible as a palpitating blood-spot. As it develops, two
meandering blood-vessels extend to the surrounding tunics. A little
later, he observes, the body becomes distinguishable, at first very
small and white, the head being clearly distinguished and the eyes very
large (Figs. 46-7, p. 117). To follow the main features of the later
stages was a comparatively easy task.

Aristotle was greatly impressed by these phenomena. He lays stress on
the early appearance of the heart in the embryo. Corresponding to the
general gradational view that he had formed of Nature, he held that the
most primitive and fundamentally important organs make their appearance
before the others. Among the organs all give place to the heart, which
he considered the first to live and the last to die. In the heart, as
we have seen, he placed the seat of the intelligence.

Thus, not only in his account of the ‘Ladder of Nature’, but also
in his theories of individual development, Aristotle exhibits some
approach to evolutionary doctrine. This is somewhat obscured, however,
by his peculiar view of the nature of procreation. On this topic his
general conclusion is that the material substance of the embryo is
contributed by the female, but that this is mere passive formable
material, almost as though it were the soil in which the embryo grows.
The male, by giving the principle of life, the _soul_ (_psyche_),
contributes the essential generative agency. But this _soul_ is not
material, and it is not, therefore, theoretically necessary for
anything material to pass from male to female. The material which does
in fact pass with the semen of the male is, as the older philosophers
would have said, an _accident_, not an _essential_. The essential
contribution of the male is not matter but _form_ and _principle_.

The female then only provides the _material_, the male the _soul_, the
form, the principle, that which makes life. Aristotle was thus prepared
to accept instances of fertilization without material contact, i.e.,
in effect, _parthenogenesis_ or ‘virgin birth’. In the centuries that
came after him such instances were not infrequently adduced, and this
doctrine was given a special turn by Christian theologians. Belief in
the ‘accidental’ character of the material contribution of the male was
common among men of science till the nineteenth century. The general
attitude as to the nature of fertilization set forth, for instance, by
William Harvey (1578-1657, pp. 111-14) in his book, _On the Generation
of Animals_, published in London in A.D. 1651, is practically identical
with the views of Aristotle published in Athens about 350 B.C., just
2,000 years earlier. It is of great interest to note that very recent
embryological research goes some way to confirm this view of Aristotle.
Without any intervention of the male sexual element, it is possible
so to stimulate the egg mechanically as to produce a perfect animal
which is thus fatherless from the first. The male element is indeed
unnecessary and, in fact, transmits only hereditary characters.

We must say something concerning Aristotle’s conceptions of the nature
of Life itself. He was before all things a ‘vitalist’. For him the
distinction between living and not-living substance is to be sought not
in material constitution, but in the presence or absence of something
that he calls _psyche_, which we may translate ‘Soul’. His teaching on
this topic had the profoundest influence on subsequent anatomical and
physiological thought.

Aristotle’s theory as to the relation of this Soul to material things
is a difficult and complicated subject. Its adequate discussion would
take us beyond our theme. He holds, however, that the Soul is related
to the idea of _form_. In living things the soul is that which gives
form. It is the pervasion by the soul that leads to the determinate
development of the body and its parts. This activity of the Soul, under
the Aristotelian term _Entelechy_ (which we may perhaps translate ‘the
indwelling perfectability’ or ‘purposiveness’, see _Preface_), has an
important place in modern biological theory, which has, indeed, swung
definitely in the direction of the Aristotelian position.

Aristotle defines Life, existing in Matter, as ‘the power of
self-nourishment and of independent growth and decay’. Of the Soul, the
principle of Life, he distinguishes three orders or types, the lowest
_vegetative_, or nutritive and reproductive, next the _animal_ or
sensitive, and highest the _rational_ or intellectual soul. The last,
he at first held, was peculiar to man, but later he modified this view.



The history of the reception of Aristotle’s science by later ages is
very strange to modern eyes. Of all Aristotle’s scientific teachings,
men clung most firmly for many centuries not to his finely thought-out
biological conceptions, but to a doctrine of the constitution of
matter of which the modern student hears nothing. Aristotle, following
more ancient writers, held that there were four primary and opposite
fundamental _Qualities_, the _hot_ and the _cold_, the _wet_ and
the _dry_. These met in binary combination to constitute the four
Essences or Existences which entered in varying proportions into the
constitution of all Matter. The four Essences, or, to give them their
usual name, _Elements_, were _earth_, _air_, _fire_, and _water_. Thus,
water was wet and cold, fire hot and dry, and so forth. With this
theory later writers combined the somewhat similar Hippocratic doctrine
which held that the body was composed of the four ‘Humors’ or liquids:
_blood_, _phlegm_, _black bile_ (melancholy), and _yellow bile_
(choler). Some of the Hippocratic physicians had associated excess of
the Humors with various types of bodily constitution. Their followers
made much of the ‘temperaments’ resulting therefrom, and according
to the prevailing humor they distinguished the sanguine, phlegmatic,
melancholy or choleric temperament (Fig. 34, p. 97).

These conceptions, now departed altogether from our scientific
discipline, still persist embedded in our language. Poetry still uses
such ideas as the ‘raging of the elements’ and ‘elemental forces’.
We may yet speak of a ‘fiery nature’ or an ‘aerial spirit’. We know
what is meant by a _sanguine_ or a _phlegmatic_ temperament, and a
_melancholy_ or _choleric_ disposition, and such words conjure up
real pictures in our minds (Fig. 34). Until it began to be undermined
by Robert Boyle (1627-91) and others in the seventeenth century, the
doctrine of the four elements persisted in its entirety, while ideas
and terms derived from the old humoral pathology can, in fact, be
traced in the medicine of the twentieth century.

The biological activity of the school of Aristotle was continued after
his death by his pupil Theophrastus (372-287 B.C.). Especially the
writings on plants of Theophrastus are instinct with a thoroughly
scientific spirit, and are rightly regarded as the basic documents
of the science of Botany. Nevertheless, his works had little effect
or influence on his contemporaries and successors. With Theophrastus
the purely biological school of Aristotle may be said to come to an
end. The biological sciences ceased, for many centuries, to be studied
for their own sake and became mere handmaidens of Medicine. Neither
mistress nor servant was the better for the change.




II

THE HEIRS OF GREECE

(300 B.C. TO A.D. 200.)


§ 1. _The Alexandrian School._

Soon after Aristotle, about 300 B.C., a great medical school was
founded at Alexandria in Egypt. That country had been conquered by
Alexander the Great, after whom the town was named. On Alexander’s
death, Egypt came under the rule of one of his generals, Ptolemy,
who established a dynasty which became extinct with the famous Queen
Cleopatra, thirty years before the Christian era. Alexandria was a
favorite residence of this Greek dynasty and became more Greek than
Egyptian. Ptolemy and his successors were patrons of learning, and
at the Alexandrian school remarkable anatomical and physiological
researches were made. These were the work of Greek physicians who, in
the tradition of their people, were only too wont to associate their
discoveries with sweeping theoretical generalizations, often on very
inadequate bases.

The two earliest medical teachers at Alexandria were also the greatest,
Herophilus of Chalcedon, who flourished about 300 B.C., and his
slightly younger contemporary Erasistratus of Chios. Herophilus may
be regarded as the father of Anatomy, Erasistratus as the father of
Physiology.

Herophilus was probably the first to dissect the human body in public.
He recognized the brain as the central organ of the nervous system and
regarded it as the seat of the intelligence, thus reversing the verdict
of Aristotle on the primacy of the heart. He was the first to grasp the
nature of the nerves, which he distinguished as connected with motion
and sensation (Fig. 98), though he did not separate them clearly from
tendons and sinews. He greatly extended the knowledge of the parts
of the brain. Certain parts of the brain still bear titles which are
translations of those which he gave them. He also made the first clear
distinction between arteries and veins.

At the time of the institution of the Alexandrian medical school, and
for long after, there flourished that view of the structure of the
world known as _atomic_, propounded by the philosopher Democritus
(_c._ 400 B.C.). The chief exponent of the theory was Epicurus
(342-270), whose philosophy was of the order which we should now call
‘materialistic’. For it the only ultimate realities were atoms and
‘the void’, and everything was ultimately expressible in these terms.
Epicurean philosophy was not without its reactions on Medicine at
Alexandria, where its leading exponent was Erasistratus of Chios.

Erasistratus was essentially a rationalist and professed himself a
foe to all mysticism. In the last resort, however, he had to invoke
the idea of Nature as a great artist acting as an external power,
shaping the body according to the ends to which it must act. This is
in contrast with Aristotle’s view of the ‘soul’ as an _Entelechy_ (p.
33), an innate and inherent factor. Erasistratus sought to express
his views in atomic terms, but, to make physiology intelligible, he
added a conception, _Pneumatism_, found also among older thinkers.
Pneumatism is the belief that the phenomena of life are associated with
the existence of a subtle vapor, ‘pneuma’ or spirit, which permeates
the organism, and causes its movements. This subtle vapor is held to
have some affinities with the air we breathe. Pneumatism is, in fact, a
primitive attempt to explain the phenomena of respiration.

Erasistratus observed that every organ is equipped with a threefold
system of ‘vessels’, vein, artery, and nerve, which divide to the
very limits of vision, and he considered that the process of division
continues beyond those limits. The minute divisions of these vessels,
plaited together, he believed to make up the tissues. Veins, arteries,
and nerves are, for him, made of minute tubes of the same nature as
themselves, through which they are nourished. Blood and two kinds of
pneuma are the essential sources of nourishment and movement. The blood
is carried by veins. Air, on the other hand, is taken in by the lungs
and passes to the heart, where it becomes changed into a peculiar
pneuma, the _Vital Spirit_, which is sent to the various parts of the
body by the arteries. This spirit is carried to the brain, in the
cavities or ‘ventricles’ of which it is further changed to a second
kind of pneuma, the _Animal Spirit_. The animal spirit is conveyed to
different parts of the body by the nerves, which are hollow.

In the brain Erasistratus observed the convolutions, noted that they
were more elaborate in man than in animals, and associated this
complexity with the higher intelligence of man. He distinguished
between the main parts of the brain, the ‘cerebrum’ and ‘cerebellum’
(Fig. 100, p. 210), and gave a detailed description of the ‘cerebral
ventricles’ or cavities within the brain and of the ‘meninges’ or
membranes that cover the brain. He considered that the cerebral
ventricles were filled with _Animal Spirit_. (Compare Galen’s scheme,
p. 58.)

Erasistratus attained to a clear view of the action of muscles in
producing movement. He regarded the shortening of muscles as due to
distension by _Animal Spirit_ conveyed to the muscles by the nerves. We
may note that similar theories as to the nature of muscular action were
again set forth, on theoretical grounds, in the seventeenth century by
Descartes (1596-1650, pp. 127-8) and by Borelli (1608-79, pp. 129-30),
but were rebutted by the experiments of Swammerdam (1637-80, p. 123).
We may recall that we are still in the dark as to the mechanism of
contraction of muscle fiber, the structure of which was first revealed
by Leeuwenhoek (1632-1723, Figs. 55-56A, p. 121).

Erasistratus considered the chief cause of disease to be excess
of blood or _Plethora_. Diseases thus caused differ according to
their site. Among them are coughing of blood, epilepsy, pneumonia,
tonsillitis, &c. Most of these diseases could be treated by diminishing
the local supply of blood by starvation. Among his contemporaries and
successors blood-letting was an habitual practice applied to almost
every condition. Erasistratus employed it but rarely, and his followers
banned it altogether. He was consistently opposed to violent remedies.
Among the therapeutic measures which he favored were regulated
exercise, diet, and the vapor bath.

Erasistratus complained that many physicians of his time were not
interested in Hygiene. He therefore wrote a treatise on the subject.
Though he regarded Hygiene as a means of substituting prevention for
cure, this did not prevent him from being extremely careful and precise
in his treatment of cases.

After the first generation or two, the activity of the Alexandrian
medical school flagged, though the city long remained a great teaching
center, and minor medical advances were made. Surgery (cf. Fig. 14)
seems to have languished less than Medicine. The stagnation in medical
matters at Alexandria is in contrast to the continued activity there in
Mathematics, Astronomy, Mechanics and Geography.

With the absorption of Egypt into the Roman Empire in 50 B.C. and
the extinction of the Ptolemaic dynasty by the death of Cleopatra in
30 B.C., Alexandria ceased to have great scientific importance. The
school continued for centuries with restricted activity and devoid
of all originality. Intellectually, it had become subordinate to the
Metropolis. Rome was now mistress of the world and the future of
Medicine must be considered from the point of view of the Roman Empire.




§ 2. _Medical Teaching in the Roman Empire._

The original native Roman medical system was quite devoid of scientific
elements and was that of a people of the lower culture. Interwoven,
as is all primitive Medicine, with ideas that trespass on the domains
of religion and magic, it possessed that multitude of ‘specialist
deities’ which was so characteristic of the Roman cults. The entire
external aspect of Roman medicine was changed by the advent of Greek
science. Yet, notwithstanding the large medical field that the Western
Empire provided, and the wide acceptance of Greek medicine by the upper
classes, it is remarkable that the Latin-speaking peoples produced no
eminent physician.

At first scientific medical education at Rome was entirely a matter of
private teaching. The earliest important scientific teacher there was
the Greek Asclepiades of Bithynia (died _c._ 40 B.C.), a contemporary
of the poet Lucretius and, like him, an Epicurean. Asclepiades, like
Erasistratus, imported the atomic view of Democritus into Medicine. He
deeply influenced the course of later medical thought, ridiculed the
Hippocratic attitude of relying on the ‘healing power of nature’ which
he regarded as a mere ‘meditation on death’, and urged that active
measures were needed for the process of cure to be ‘seemly, swift and
sure’. He founded a regular school at Rome which continued after him.

At first the school was the mere personal following of the physician,
who took his pupils and apprentices round with him on his visits. At
a later stage such groups combined to form societies or colleges,
where problems of the art were debated. Towards the end of the reign
of Augustus (27 B.C.-14 A.D.) or the beginning of that of Tiberius
(14 A.D.-37 A.D.), these societies constructed for themselves a
meeting-place on the Esquiline Hill. Finally the emperors built
halls or _auditoria_ for the teaching of Medicine. The professors at
first received only the pupils’ fees. It was not until the time of
the Emperor Vespasian (reigned A.D. 70-9) that medical teachers were
given a salary at the public expense. The system was extended by later
emperors.

Thus Rome became a center of medical instruction. After a time
subsidiary centers were established in other Italian towns. From Italy
the custom spread and we meet traces of such schools at the half-Greek
Marseilles as well as at Bordeaux, Arles, Nîmes, Lyons, and Saragossa.
For the most part these provincial schools produced workaday medical
men, few of whose writings have come down to us. They were perhaps
largely training-places for the army surgeons. That class seldom had
scientific interests, though Dioscorides, one of the most prominent
physicians of antiquity, one who earned the respect of Galen and has
deeply influenced the modern pharmacopoeia, served in the army under
Nero. His book is, in fact, an extremely useful though ill-arranged
compendium of drugs. Dioscorides wrote in Greek, and his work was not
translated into Latin until the sixth century of our era.

The earliest scientific medical work in Latin is the _De re medica_ of
Celsus, which was prepared about A.D. 30. It is in many ways the most
readable and well-arranged ancient medical work that we have. It is,
however, not an original work but a compilation from the Greek, and the
sole surviving part of a complete encyclopaedia of knowledge. Many of
its phrases are closely reminiscent of the _Hippocratic Collection_.
The ethical tone is high and the general line of treatment sensible and
humane. Celsus, though almost forgotten in the Middle Ages, was the
first classical medical writer to be printed (A.D. 1476).

The treatise of Celsus opens with an interesting account of the History
of Medicine. It then passes on to deal with diet and the general
principles of therapeutics and pathology, next it discusses internal
disease, and then turns to external diseases. The last part of the work
is devoted to surgery, and is perhaps the most valuable of the whole.

Celsus professes himself a follower of Asclepiades of Bithynia (p.
41), but, unlike his master, he by no means despises the Hippocratic
_expectant_ method of ‘waiting on the disease’. In many matters we are
struck with

his boldness as a surgeon. Thus he describes plastic operations on the
face and mouth, and the removal of polypus from the nose. He tells too
of the very dangerous operation for extirpating a goiter (p. 303), and
of cutting for stone. He gives an excellent account of what might be
thought the modern operation for removal of tonsils. Noteworthy also
is his description of dental practice which includes the wiring of
loose teeth and an account of a dental mirror. An idea of the surgical
instruments in use in his time can be obtained from those recovered
from Pompeii (Fig. 15).




§ 3. _Medical Services of the Roman Empire._

If, in Medicine itself, the Roman achieved but few advances, in the
organization of medical service, and especially in the department which
deals with public health, his position is far more noteworthy. All
Latin writers on architecture give much attention to the orientation,
position and drainage of buildings. From an early date sanitation and
public health drew the attention of statesmen. Considering the dread of
the neighborhood of marshes on the part of these practical sanitarians
of Ancient Rome, and in view of modern knowledge of the mosquito-borne
character of Malaria (pp. 284-5), it entertaining to find the mosquito
net ridiculed by the poets Horace, Juvenal and Propertius!

Sanitation was a feature of Roman life. Rome was already provided with
_cloacae_ or subterranean sewers in the age of the Tarquins (6th cent.
B.C.). The _Cloaca Maxima_ itself, the main drain of Rome, which is
still in use, dates back to that period.

The antiquity of hygienic ideas is seen in an interdict, by a law
of about 450 B.C., against burials within the city walls and in the
instructions issued to the town officials to attend to the cleanliness
of the streets and to the distribution of water. Among these ancient
laws we may note one attributed to the first king of Rome, which
directed the opening of the body in the hope of extracting a living
child in the case of a woman dying in pregnancy. It is the origin of
the so-called ‘Caesarean section’ on the living mother, the method by
which Caesar himself is said to have been brought into the world. At
the date of these decrees physicians in Rome were either slaves or in
an entirely subordinate position. Their status was improved by Julius
Caesar (102-44 B.C.), who conferred citizenship on all who practised
Medicine at Rome, in order to induce physicians to settle there.



The finest monument to the Roman care for the public health stands yet
for all to see in the remains of the fourteen great aqueducts which
supplied the city with 300,000,000 gallons of potable water daily. No
modern city is better equipped (Fig. 16).

Under the early Empire a definite public medical service was
constituted. Public physicians were appointed to the various towns and
institutions. A statute of the Emperor Antoninus of about the year A.D.
160 regulates the appointment of these physicians, whose main duty was
to attend to the poor. In the code of the Emperor Justinian (A.D. 533)
is an article urging them to give this service cheerfully rather than
the more subservient attendance on the wealthy. Their salaries were
fixed by the municipal councillors. They were encouraged to undertake
the training of pupils. Inscriptions attest the respect in which these
state physicians were held in many towns.

It is in connection with the army that we see the Roman medical
system at its best. There was an adequate supply of military medical
attendants who were well organized (Fig. 17). The defects of the Roman
army medical system were, however, absence of any elastic scheme for
the ranking of medical officers, and complete subordination of the
medical to the combatant officer. These facts are of a piece with the
general Roman indifference to theoretical science, and explain

why the Roman army surgeons made no additions to knowledge. The social
status of the medical staff in the Roman military hierarchy was that of
the non-commissioned personnel, which included accountants, registrars
and secretaries.




§ 4. _Roman Hospitals._

The great contribution of Rome to Medicine--and it is a very great
one--is the hospital system. It is a scheme that naturally arose out
of the Roman genius for organization and is connected with the Roman
military system. Among the Greeks, _iatreia_, ‘surgeries’, were well
known; they were, however, the private property of the medical man.
Larger institutions were connected with Aesculapian temples and there
is evidence of some degree of scientific medical treatment in these
places. In the Republican period the Romans were no better off and,
despite the vast numbers of slaves, there was no provision for them
when sick. A temple to Aesculapius had been established on an island of
the Tiber in Republican times. It became the custom to expose the sick
and worn-out slaves on this island of Aesculapius, to avoid the trouble
of treating them. The Emperor Claudius (A.D. 41-54) decreed that such
slaves were free, and that, if they recovered, they need not return to
the control of their masters. Thus, the island became a place of refuge
for the sick poor. We may regard it as an early form of public hospital
(Fig. 18).

Later writers speak of _valetudinaria_, ‘infirmaries’, for such
persons, and give humane directions for their management. Such
valetudinaria were in use even by free Romans. The excavations at
Pompeii show that a physician’s house might even be built somewhat on
the lines of a modern ‘nursing home’. It was probably in the provinces
that private institutions first developed into subventioned public
hospitals.

This development of public hospitals naturally early affected military
life. At first, sick soldiers had been sent home for treatment. As the
Roman frontiers spread ever wider this became impossible and military
hospitals were founded at important strategic points. The sites of
several such military hospitals have been excavated. The best explored
is near Düsseldorf and was founded about A.D. 100.

From the military valetudinarium it was no great step to the
construction of similar institutions for the numerous Imperial
officials and their families in the provincial towns. Motives of
benevolence, too, gradually came in, and public hospitals were
founded in many localities. The idea passed on to Christian times,
and the pious foundation of hospitals for the sick and outcast in the
Middle Ages is to be traced back to these Roman valetudinaria. The
first charitable institution of this kind, concerning which we have
clear information, was established at Rome in the fourth century by
a Christian lady of whom we learn from St. Jerome. The plan of such
a hospital projected at St. Gall in the early years of the ninth
century has survived. It reminds us, in many respects, of the early
Roman military hospitals. These medieval hospitals for the sick must
naturally be distinguished from the even more numerous ‘spitals’ for
travellers and pilgrims, the idea of which may perhaps be traced back
to the rest-houses along the strategic roads of the Empire.




§ 5. _Galen._

The Latin culture, as we have seen, did not adapt itself easily to the
prosecution of scientific Medicine. Long after Greece had ceased to
exist as an independent state such medical writings as appeared were
usually in the Greek rather than in the Latin language. This is true
to the end, and the end came, so far as creative science is concerned,
with the second half of the second century. The scene is then, and for
centuries to come, mainly occupied by the huge overshadowing figure of
Galen.

Galen of Pergamum (A.D. 130-200) devoted himself to medicine from an
early age, and in his twenty-first year we hear of him studying anatomy
at Smyrna. To extend his knowledge of drugs he made long journeys
to Asia Minor. Later he proceeded to Alexandria, where he improved
his anatomical equipment, and here, he tells us, he examined a human
skeleton. His direct practical acquaintance with human anatomy was
limited to that skeleton, for dissection of the human body was no
longer carried on in his time. Thus, his physiology and anatomy were
derived mainly from animal sources.

The general medical standpoint of the Galenic is not unlike that of
the Hippocratic writings, but the noble vision of the lofty-minded,
pure-souled physician has utterly passed away. In its place we have an
acute, contentious fellow of prodigious industry, who is frequently
satisfied with a purely verbal explanation. Yet he is an ingenious
physiologist, acquainted with the internal parts, so far as this is
possible from a devotion to dissection of animals, equipped with
all the learning of the schools of Pergamum, Smyrna and Alexandria,
and rich with the experience of a vast practice at Rome. Galen is
essentially an ‘efficient’ man. He has the grace to acknowledge
constantly his indebtedness to the Hippocratic writings.

Some of Galen’s works are, however, mere drug-lists, little superior to
those of Dioscorides (p. 43). With the depression of the intelligence
that corresponded with the break-up of the Roman Empire, it was these
that were chiefly studied and distributed in the West. The Greek
medical writers after Galen were but his imitators and abstractors, and
they usually imitated and abstracted Galen at his worst. Through some
of them Galen’s works reached the West at a very early period in the
Middle Ages.


§ 6. _The Final Medical Synthesis of Antiquity._

We now turn to the theoretical content of the vast mass of Galenic
writings. These set forth a medical system of which the substance
is based on the _Hippocratic Collection_ and the form derived from
Aristotle. This synthesis, in more or less corrupted form, provided
the theoretical basis of medical practice for the next fifteen hundred
years. Galen’s view of the human body may be examined under two
aspects, which we describe as (_a_) philosophical and (_b_) descriptive.

First as to the philosophical aspect. Galen’s voluminous works are
saturated with the theory that all structures in the body have been
formed by the Creator for a known and intelligible end. In the
anatomical works, masses of explanation, based on this view, dilute
the often imperfect accounts of structures. Thus, following the
Aristotelian principle that Nature makes nought in vain, Galen seeks to
justify, the form and structure of every organ--nay, of every part of
every organ--with reference to the functions for which he believes it
is destined. To do this is to claim that in every work of Creation--of
which Man’s body is a type--and in every detail of such work, we can
demonstrate God’s design along known principles. It is to claim, in
fact, a complete knowledge of the Laws of Nature. No modern man of
science, however intoxicated with his own achievements, has as yet
arrogated such powers to himself. To conceive that such claims should
be made by a pious, theistically minded author, the reader must think
himself back into a very different philosophical environment from that
to which we are nowadays accustomed.

The prevailing philosophy of Galen’s world was the Stoic. Now in the
world of the Stoic philosopher all things were determinate, and they
were determined by forces acting wholly outside Man. The type and
origin of that determination the Stoic sought in the heavens, and found
in the majestic and overwhelming procession of the stars. The recurring
phenomena of the spheres typified, foreshadowed, nay, exhibited and
controlled, the cycle of man’s life. Man dwelt in a finite world,
bounded by a definite frontier--the sphere of the fixed stars. Within
that spherical frontier all things worked by rule--and that rule was
the rule of the heavenly bodies. Astrology had become one of the dogmas
of the Stoic creed.

To such a world Galen’s determination was in itself no strange thought.
Yet Galen’s view was far from being wholly in accord with Stoicism.
Though a determinism, it was a determinism of perfection in which all
was fixed by a wise and far-seeing God, and was a reflection of His
perfection. Now such a scheme did not ill fit the new creed which was
just beginning to raise its head and was destined to replace Stoicism
and all the other pagan schemes. Galen’s thought, in fact, made a
special appeal to the Christian point of view, and this is, doubtless,
the reason that his works have been preserved in larger bulk than
those of any other pagan writer. The Galenic standpoint appealed
equally to the theological bias of Islam, whose medical knowledge was
based almost entirely on Galen.

We may now turn from the philosophical to the descriptive bases of
Galen’s medical system, namely to his Anatomy and Physiology.

We may begin with the bones. These Galen had studied on an actual human
skeleton at Alexandria. He divided them into long bones with a central
canal and flat bones without such a canal. He had a fairly good idea
of the bones of the skull. He regarded the teeth as bones, and he
gives a good description of their origin. He recognized twenty-four
vertebrae terminated by the _sacrum_. Galen gives accurate elementary
descriptions of the vertebrae, of the ribs, of the breastbone, of
the collar-bone, and of the bones of the limbs. He divides joints or
junctions of bones into two main orders, those with movement and those
without movement, and the titles that he gives to his main divisions
have survived in our modern nomenclature.

As regards the muscular system there can be little doubt that Galen’s
work was in large part of a really pioneer character. Throughout
his works the muscles are perhaps the structures that he describes
most accurately. His writings contain frequent references to form
and function of muscles of various animals. Thus, the dissection of
the muscles of the orbit and larynx was performed on the ox, and the
muscles of the tongue are described from the ape. Occasionally he
indicates that he is aware of the differences between certain of the
muscles he is describing from those of man. For his investigation of
muscles Galen used particularly the Barbary ape (_Macacus inuus_),
a creature anatomically near enough to man for a knowledge of its
detailed structure to be applicable to human Surgery. (Figs. 19 and 20.)



Galen’s description of the brain and of the vascular system is inferior
to his account of the bones and muscles. His account of the nervous
system, other than the brain, occupies an intermediate position. His
account of the origin of nerves from the brain has left its traces even
in modern descriptive anatomy.

Finally we may turn to Galen’s theory of the working of the human body,
that is to his Physiology.

The basic principle of life in the Galenic physiology was a _spirit_ or
_pneuma_ drawn from the general World-spirit in the act of breathing.
It entered the body through the windpipe or _trachea_ and so passed to
the lung and thence, through the _arteria venalis_--which we now call
the ‘pulmonary vein’--to the left ventricle of the heart, where it
encountered the blood (Fig. 21). But what was the origin of the blood?
To this question his answer was ingenious, and the errors that it
involved remained till the time of Harvey (Fig. 43, p. 113).

Galen believed that food-substance from the intestines was carried as
‘Chyle’ by the portal vein to the liver. There it was converted into
blood and endowed with a particular pneuma, the _Natural Spirit_, which
bestowed the power of growth and nutrition. Part of this lower-grade
blood was carried from the liver to the right ventricle, where it gave
off impurities by way of the _vena arterialis_, our ‘pulmonary artery,’
to the lungs, whence they were exhaled in the breath. The venous
blood, thus continuously purified, ebbed to and fro in the veins
for purposes of ordinary nutrition. A very small part of this venous
blood passed through invisible pores in the muscular septum to the left
ventricle. There it mixed with air drawn in from the lung by way of the
_arteria venalis_, our ‘pulmonary vein’. From this mixture was produced
a higher-grade blood, the arterial blood, instinct with the principle
of life and charged with a second kind of pneuma, the _Vital Spirit_.
Blood containing this second kind of pneuma ebbed to and fro in the
arteries endowing the various organs with function. Such as reached the
brain became there charged with the noblest essence of all, the third
pneuma, the _Animal Spirit_ or breath of the soul. The _Animal Spirit_
was carried from the brain by the nerves--believed to be hollow--and
through them initiated the higher functions of the organism, including
motion and sensation (Fig. 21).

Among Galen’s most remarkable efforts are the investigations he made
of the physiology of the nervous system. He tells of his experiments
on the spinal cord. Injury to the cord between the first and second
vertebrae caused, he observed, instantaneous death. Section between
the third and fourth produced arrest of breathing. Below the sixth
vertebra it gave rise to paralysis of the chest muscles, breathing
being then carried on only by the diaphragm. If the lesion was lower
the paralysis was confined to the lower limbs, bladder, and intestines.
The physiology of the spinal cord is worked out most ably and in very
considerable detail.

Galen established no school, nor had he any definite followers. His
self-satisfaction and love of controversy were not of the kind that
would endear him to disciples. On his death in A.D. 200 the active
prosecution of anatomical and physiological inquiry ceased absolutely.
The curtain descends at once, and, for the subject we are discussing,
the Dark Ages have begun.

Rational medicine in the pagan world descends into darkness as surely
and even more abruptly than Philosophy. The whole system is soon to be
overwhelmed. Alexandria has long been in decline. A mob, fanatically
Christian, has destroyed her school and library, with all the hoarded
wisdom of the pagan past. Men of the new faith fix their eyes on the
wrath to come and the glory after it. In the race for salvation, who
will pause to consider this miserable tenement of clay? Antiquity is no
more. A new age has begun.






III

THE MIDDLE AGES

(FROM ABOUT A.D. 200 TO ABOUT A.D. 1500.)


§ 1. _The Period of Depression in Europe._

The observational period of Antiquity closed with Galen. The centuries
that follow exhibit progressive deterioration of the intellect. For
that deterioration many causes have been assigned. An important factor
was certainly the philosophical outlook of later paganism. Men lacked a
motive for living. Their view of the World was dreary and without hope.
It is sometimes alleged that the advent of Christianity was a factor
in the decay of Science, but Science was, in fact, in headlong decay
before Christianity was in a position to have any real effect on pagan
thought.

Christianity came to the ancient world as a protest and a revulsion
against the prevailing and extremely pessimistic pagan outlook.
Christianity brought men something for which to live. It was natural
that it should oppose the philosophical basis of pagan thought. In
this sense Christianity was certainly anti-scientific. Early Christian
thought exhibits an aversion to the view which places the whole of
man’s fate under the dominion, the inescapable tyranny, of Natural
Law. It is, however, essential to remember that the early Church, in
developing this opposition, was not dealing with living observational
Science. The conflict was simply with a philosophical tradition which
contained dead, non-progressive and misunderstood scientific elements.

For some eight centuries from the time that Christianity finally
replaced Paganism in the Roman Empire--from about A.D. 400 to about
A.D. 1200--such remains of classical learning and classical science as
survived were in monastic keeping. It was only in the monasteries that
there were any who cared at all for these things, and it was only in
the monasteries that manuscripts could be either written or preserved.
We cannot be sufficiently grateful to the monks for having succeeded in
preserving even as much as they did. Nevertheless, whether we consider
what they saved or what they lost of medical literature, we can express
no high opinion of either monastic taste or monastic judgment.

The curse of the Science of Medicine, as of all sciences, has always
been the so-called ‘practical man’, who will consider only the
immediate end of his art, without regard to the knowledge on which it
is based. Monkish medicine had no thought save for the immediate relief
of the patient. All theoretical knowledge was permitted to lapse.
Anatomy and Physiology perished. Prognosis was reduced to an absurd
rule of thumb. Botany became a drug-list. Superstitious practices crept
in, and Medicine deteriorated into a collection of formulae, punctuated
by incantations, which became less understood and further removed
from their originals at each copying. Medicine remained surrounded by
sacred associations (Fig. 22), but the scientific stream, which is its
life-blood, was dried up at its source.



There was just one area in the Latin West where a slightly higher
standard prevailed. In the South of Italy the Greek tongue still
continued for centuries to be spoken and written. Though civilization
had sadly deteriorated with the disorders of the times, yet there
remained here and there in that region a slightly higher intellectual
standard than prevailed elsewhere in Europe. Moreover, about the same
time as the Norman Conquest in England, there was a Norman Conquest
of South Italy also. The strong arm of the Norman administrator might
wield the weapon of a tyrant, but at least it brought order where
there had been anarchy. Learning under the Normans could lift a timid
head. Notably at the town of Salerno, not far from Naples, there arose
something resembling a medical school. At Salerno in the eleventh
century there was a certain amount of translation of medical works from
Greek into Latin. The choice of works for translation was very poor,
but it was something that enough mental energy existed for the effort.



Salerno differed too from other centers of learning of the time in that
instruction was not entirely under monastic auspices (Fig. 25). Some,
at least, of the Salernitan physicians were laymen. At the time of the
Norman conquest of Salerno, the school was stimulated by the advent of
a wanderer from the East, Constantine by name (died 1087). This man
brought with him medical works in Arabic which he was able to translate
into rude Latin. The Latin versions prepared by Constantine, corrupt,
confused, barbarous, often almost incomprehensible, were yet a better
intellectual fare than that on which the torpid mind of Europe had
long fed. The Salernitan medical writings of the eleventh and twelfth
centuries exhibit some faint-hearted attempts to return to Nature.
Constantine was but the harbinger of the great ‘Arabian revival’ the
further origins of which we must now seek to trace.




§ 2. _Arabic Medicine._

Barbarian incursions sapped and finally destroyed the Western Roman
Empire. The influence of those incursions on the Eastern Empire was
less dramatic. It is true that the intellectual outlook of the East
Roman or Byzantine Empire was no less modified, in the course of time,
than was that of the West. In the absence, however, of any collapse
of the system of government, the ancient Greek learning or rather the
documentary casing in which it was enshrined, was better preserved
than were the Latin traditions. Men in the Eastern Empire could still
read the ancient Greek medical works in the language in which they had
been written, and, if their reading was unintelligent, it was at least
persistent. Moreover, heretical Christian sects on the confines of the
East Roman Empire prepared for themselves translations of many of the
ancient Greek authors. One of these heretical sects, the Nestorians,
exhibited great missionary activity. It was perhaps on this account
that the Nestorians prepared translations of many Greek medical works
into their own language, Syriac.

In the seventh century, Islam arose and soon swept over vast areas
that had erstwhile belonged to the Emperor of the East. The territory
occupied by the Nestorians in the Near East came early under Moslem
rule. The Moslems, at first indifferent to infidel learning, came
gradually to appreciate it. In the ninth century a great and united
Moslem Empire was established with its center at Bagdad. The need for
translation of Greek scientific works into Arabic, the common language
of Islam, now asserted itself. One after another the medical writings
that had been turned into Syriac were translated into Arabic, and Greek
Science in general and Greek Medicine in particular were thus spread
far and wide in the Moslem world.

Greek science in the Arabic version came in time to be better
understood by Arabic-speaking students than it had been by any since
Galen. Nor were the Arabic-speaking peoples content to rest on the
texts that had thus descended to them from antiquity. A considerable
number of Arabic writers produced works of their own, some not wholly
devoid of originality. Unfortunately these men were without effective
anatomical or physiological basis for their medical knowledge, though
many of them were acute clinical observers, and, even from the modern
point of view, some of their works are not wholly contemptible. Thus
Rhazes (860-932), a native of Basra on the Persian Gulf, wrote a work
containing the first known description of Measles, which he carefully
distinguishes from Small-pox. The Persian Avicenna (980-1036) composed
a vast encyclopaedia of medical knowledge, the so-called _Canon_, which
served as the main text-book of Medicine both among the Arabic-speaking
peoples and in the Latin West until the seventeenth century. The Jew,
Isaac of Kairouan (852-952), composed a treatise on fevers which was
the best account of the subject available in Europe during the entire
Middle Ages. The Moor, Albucasis (11th cent.), left a text-book of
surgery which was an important element in the revival of the subject in
Italy and France.

These are only prominent members of a vast school of writers who
flourished in Arabic-speaking countries between the ninth and
thirteenth centuries. The bulk and number of their writings is
portentous. Many of their works were translated into Latin, often
by Jewish translators (Fig. 26). These Latin translations caused a
reawakening of the intellect of Europe, and provided the staple reading
in the medieval universities throughout the Middle Ages.




§ 3. _The Medieval Awakening._

The Spanish peninsula had been inundated by the Islamic tide as early
as the eighth century. After a while the waters began to recede. The
speech and culture of Islam had become stamped upon the natives of the
peninsula, and were only gradually replaced by the Latin civilization
and dialect which we now call Spanish. During the centuries of Islamic
retreat, there was thus a bilingual population in the peninsula, so
that access to the Arabic learning became possible. The translations
that were to have influence on Europe were always into Latin. To make
or to obtain such translations many adventurous spirits journeyed from
Christian Europe into Spain, or sometimes into Sicily where conditions
were very similar. These men were aided in their work by native Jews or
by Mohammedans. The heretical company which they kept, together with
the strange and mysterious material which they brought back with them,
earned them a reputation as magicians. The memory, for instance, of
Michael Scot is connected with the Black Art, and has been presented by
Sir Walter Scott in his poem _The Lay of the Last Minstrel_.

The wizard Michael Scot (died 1235) journeyed in both Spain and
Sicily, learned Arabic and Hebrew, and had commerce with Mohammedans
and Jews. He turned a number of Arabic works into Latin, and, in
particular, he prepared versions of the biological works of Aristotle
(pp. 28-33) which, though corrupt and second-hand, had much influence
in determining the direction of medical thought during the Middle Ages.

There was a large class of such translators and commentators who made
Arabic Medicine accessible to the West. This Arabic-Latin literature
is generally characterized by the qualities most often associated
with the words _medieval_ and _scholastic_. It is extremely verbose
and almost wholly devoid of the literary graces. An immense amount of
attention is paid to the mere arrangement of the material, which often
occupies its authors more than the ideas that are to be conveyed.
Great stress is laid on argument, especially in the form of the
syllogism, while observation of Nature is entirely in the background.
Above all, there is a constant appeal to the authority of the ancient
masters, especially Aristotle and Galen. Lip service is often paid to
Hippocrates, but his spirit is absent from these windy discussions.

When the Latin translations from the Arabic reached the readers for
whom they were intended, they were eagerly studied. The texts were,
however, by no means permitted to remain in their pristine state,
but were submitted to exactly the same process to which their Arabic
authors had themselves subjected their Aristotelian and Galenic models.
The Christian writers of the West treated the Latin translations of
Rhazes, of Avicenna, of Isaac and of Albucasis (p. 67), as subjects
for commentary. Their works were expanded, annotated, castigated
again and again, and without any new inflow of ideas. The result is a
progressive elaboration of form and deterioration of content throughout
the centuries. Vast masses of argument, rebuttal, refutation and
confirmation drowned again the human spirit which hardly recovered from
its submersion until the sixteenth century.


§ 4. _The Universities._

Nevertheless, when these translations were new to Europe, and
especially in the thirteenth century, they caused much stir. In
this awakening a large part was played by the Universities. These
were established in numbers during the thirteenth and the following
centuries. University life gradually came to exercise a profound
effect on social, political and intellectual conditions. In most of
the Universities Medical Faculties grew up. The medical teaching was
entirely theoretical and there was no clinical instruction, though at
the beginning of the fourteenth century some advance was made by the
introduction of brief and superficial anatomical demonstrations (p. 74).

As a type of Medieval University, we may take Bologna, which was an
important center of learning from a very early date (Fig. 27). As the
Universities multiplied, they began to some extent to ‘specialize’.
Bologna had appeared first as a Law School and continued to develop
along the same line. In the second half of the thirteenth century it
was by far the most important seat of legal learning in Europe.

An organized Medical Faculty existed there as far back as 1156. The
teaching at Bologna, as in other medical schools, consisted entirely
of readings of Latin translations from Arabic which were becoming ever
more accessible. Yet it was at Bologna that public dissection was first
practised. The early advent of dissection has often impressed the
historian. There was still no botany worthy of the name, no zoology,
hardly any naturalistic art, no experimental science, no systematic
record of observation in any department. Yet dissection had become
recognized at Bologna by the end of the first quarter of the fourteenth
century. The question is why men, so little interested in Nature and
Nature’s ways, should have lent themselves to so repellent a process as
dissection of the human body? The answer is that the earliest reason
for examining the human body was simply the gathering of evidence for
legal processes. As time went on, post-mortem examination passed into
anatomical study. But still dissection did no more, and was asked to
do no more, than verify Avicenna--whom nobody doubted. It was, in fact,
little but an aid to the memory of students.

At Bologna we can trace the rise of a surgical school beginning about
the end of the twelfth century. Prominent among its early surgeons was
William of Saliceto (1215?-1280?). He wrote a very able treatise on
Surgery, containing a section on Anatomy. The anatomical portion is
borrowed from the current Arabian anatomies, but contains some evidence
of direct access to the dead human body. He includes in his work a good
description of trephining the skull (Fig. 23).

A most interesting contemporary of William of Saliceto was Thaddeus
of Florence (1223-1303), who also taught at Bologna. This man
perceived the importance of access to Greek sources, as distinct
from Graeco-Arabic, and he encouraged the preparation of good Latin
translations of medical works direct from the Greek. He stamped his
personality on the whole development of Medicine at Bologna, and he
is bound up with the beginning of dissection. But if Medicine owed a
debt to Thaddeus for introducing better texts and better Anatomy, he
did grave harm to the subject in another direction. The scholastic
and argumentative form assumed by medieval Medicine is largely due to
him, and it is to the assumption of this form that we owe the almost
complete absence of scientific advance between the thirteenth and
sixteenth centuries.




§ 5. _Medieval Anatomy, Surgery and Internal Medicine._

At the very end of the thirteenth century there came to Bologna a
Norman student, Henri de Mondeville (about 1270-1320). In 1301 he
settled at the famous Medical School at Montpellier in Southern France,
and thus transplanted to France the medical, surgical and anatomical
traditions of Bologna. Those traditions were of Arabic origin, and
mainly borrowed from Avicenna.

Contemporary with de Mondeville was one whose method of teaching shines
as a good deed in a naughty world. Mondino di Luzzi (_c._ 1270-1326)
was a pupil of Thaddeus and a fellow-student of Henri de Mondeville.
He worked systematically at Anatomy and dissected the human body
in public. His treatise on Anatomy, written in 1316, is the first
modern work on the subject. Those who preceded him incorporated their
anatomical work in larger treatises on Surgery, and do not refer
directly to their own anatomical experiences. With Mondino this is
changed. His work is essentially a practical manual of the subject
and he is with justice called the ‘Restorer of Anatomy’. He had read
widely among the Arabian anatomists, and naturally borrowed from them.
Nevertheless, his work contains a considerable number of references to
actual anatomical procedure. Moreover, he deals not only with Anatomy
in our modern sense, but also includes Physiology and much discussion
of the application of anatomical and physiological principles to
Medicine and Surgery. His book thus gives a good deal of insight into
the scientific knowledge of the day.



We would emphasize the fact that Mondino dissected _in person_. In this
respect he was wiser than his successors until the time of Vesalius.
As dissection gained formal inclusion in the curriculum, the professor
became more haughty, further removed from the object of his study.
Leaving his position by the body, where he might demonstrate to his
students, he ascended his high professorial chair, a great elevated
structure provided with steps and a reading-desk. From there he read
from his text-book while a junior colleague pointed out the line of
incision and a menial performed the actual dissection (Fig. 28). All
was thus done at third-hand and according to the written word. We are
in the scholastic period, and must not expect any frequent appeal to
Nature. Having once got into his chair, it took a good deal to persuade
the professor to descend from that dignified position. Thus, it is
saying much for Mondino that he was his own demonstrator. He took the
first and perhaps the greatest step. It was two centuries and more
before the next step was taken.

Most typical of medieval surgeons was Guy de Chauliac (1300-68),
who studied at Montpellier, Paris, and Bologna, and practised at
Montpellier and afterwards at Avignon, where he was a member of the
Papal Court. He was a man of much learning, and his _Great Surgery_
became the standard treatise on the subject during the later Middle
Ages. It fixed medieval practice. It is to be found in scores of
manuscripts and was frequently translated and printed. Among the good
points of his practice is his acceptance of responsibility for certain
operations, such as those for rupture and for cataract, which at that
time were usually left to wandering charlatans who regarded themselves
as specialists. A famous passage in his work describes the use of a
narcotic inhalation frequently used during the Middle Ages and into
modern times. Of such a narcotic it is written that:

    I’ll imitate the pities of old surgeons
    To this lost limb, who, ere they show their art,
    Cast one asleep, then cut the diseased part.

  (Thomas Middleton, _Women beware women_. First acted 1622.)

The general character of Internal Medicine during the later Middle Ages
was below that of Surgery. Modern clinical Medicine is firmly based
on such sciences as Physiology, Pharmacology, Pathology, Biochemistry
and Epidemiology. In the Middle Ages and far beyond, Physiology was
still that of Galen, which had lost in exactness what it had gained
in bulk from the Arabic and Latin commentators. Pathology was still
that of the four humors. The knowledge of drugs was empirical, and the
sciences of Pharmacology and Biochemistry as yet were not; while the
medieval conception of the nature of epidemics was the very perversion
of reason and common sense. Nevertheless, as we shall see, the Middle
Ages ultimately succeeded in instituting a limited number of effective
preventive measures.


§ 6. _Medieval Hospitals and Hygiene._

Undoubtedly an important development of medieval Medicine is its
hospital system. The public hospital arose in pagan antiquity out
of the Temples of Aesculapius and the military valetudinaria (p.
49). The conception was seized on by Christianity and developed
beyond all knowledge. In the early Christian centuries, _hospitalia_,
‘guest chambers’ or ‘guest houses’, were set aside for the numerous
_hospites_, or ‘pilgrims’. Similar buildings under the same title came
to be instituted for the care of orphans, the aged, the blind, and
other victims of fortune. Thus arose the medieval hospital system, of
which ours is the direct outgrowth.

In matters of Hygiene the Middle Ages are a byword. The health
conditions of a medieval town were far below those of the same town
under the Roman Empire. Water-supply was deficient, drains were
absent, streets and houses filthy and overcrowded, rooms unventilated.
Nevertheless, there is one important hygienic conception for which our
own age owes a considerable debt to that which preceded it. Despite
their scientific acumen in many departments, it is yet true to say
that among the physicians of classical antiquity we find no consistent
view of the transmission of infection by contact. Indeed the whole
idea of infection was effectively absent from them, so that preventive
measures based upon it could not be developed. It was reserved for the
Middle Ages to conceive serious official measures against the spread
of epidemics. These measures were consciously derived from the leper
ritual of the Bible with its fundamental concept of isolation.



During the early centuries of the Christian era, Leprosy, which had
till then been confined to the East, crept along the Mediterranean
littoral and thence northward throughout Europe. The disease was
from the first regarded as contagious, and various regulations were
introduced to isolate and separate the unfortunate sufferers. The
medieval treatment of lepers is one of the dark incidents of man’s
inhumanity to man. The leper was banished from human society. He was
declared legally dead. He was excluded even from church or allowed to
attend only in special seats where a special basin of holy water was
assigned to him. How rigorously this segregation from the ranks of free
people was carried out by law is well known. The cruel edicts were,
however, effective. In the course of centuries it freed Europe from
Leprosy, of which it is said there were at one time some 20,000 cases
in France alone. Thus about one person in 200 would have been a leper,
and the burden of the leper on the community was comparable to that,
let us say, of the feeble-minded and insane with us.

Leper inspection, the regular examination of all suspects and carriers
of leprosy, became a most elaborate business. It was entrusted to
a special branch of the civil service and was gradually freed from
ecclesiastical control.

This preventive method of combating a chronic disease, which, as we
know now, has a very low infectivity, had a peculiar and unlooked-for
result. The meticulous system of warding off the contagion of leprosy
so occupied the attention of physicians that they came to see allied
conditions in the same light. So it was that in the thirteenth century
the general concept became current of disease as contagious. A number
of other diseases besides leprosy were recognized as infectious. Among
these were Plague, fevers with obvious rashes, Phthisis, Granular
Conjunctivitis, the Itch and Erysipelas. Municipal authorities were
from time to time ordered to put patients suffering from one or other
such diseases outside the city gates. They were forbidden to traffic
in articles of food and drink and were placed under restrictions not
unlike those of lepers. The devastating epidemic of the Black Death of
1347-8 brought restrictions of this order into special force. Thus the
Black Death had somewhat the same effect on the health administration
of the day that the Cholera outbreaks of the thirties of the nineteenth
century had upon modern Europe. The health service began to be put
into more efficient order.

In the later Middle Ages there were actually instances in which the
Pest was averted or successfully combated by these means. This seems
to have been the case of Milan and Venice between the years 1370 and
1374. At that time the Plague was again advancing through Europe. The
most drastic regulations were invoked to prevent infected persons from
entering the cities, and these regulations came into force well in
advance of the disease.

There is one incident in this medieval attempt to prevent Plague that
has left a mark on our language. The Republic of Ragusa, on the eastern
side of the Adriatic, adopted and extended the regulations that had
been so successful at Venice. A landing-station was established far
from the city and the harbor. There incoming suspects had to spend
thirty days in the open air and sunlight, and any who had traffic with
them were isolated. The period of thirty days was spoken of as the
_Trentina_. Later this was found to be not long enough. The thirty
days became forty days, the _Quarantina_, whence we have the word
_Quarantine_. The system of quarantine gradually spread through Europe.
It was accompanied by very drastic destruction, by burning, of all
goods belonging to the infected.

These attempts to arrest epidemic disease were sometimes successful and
the elaboration of quarantine measures was among the few advances with
which we may credit the Middle Ages. The fact that we can now dispense
with quarantine must not blind us to its value in conditions other than
our own.




IV

THE REBIRTH OF SCIENCE

(FROM ABOUT 1500 TO ABOUT 1700)


§ 1. _The Anatomical Awakening._

During the Middle Ages beliefs about physiology were always based
on Galen. They were frequently confused and often the result of a
misunderstanding of his work. In the fifteenth century, however, took
place the so-called _Renaissance_ or _Revival of Learning_. Greek works
which had been trickling in since the thirteenth century began to be
recovered more rapidly, and to be more accurately studied. The first
step towards any improvement on the views of Galen was naturally a
proper understanding of what he had really said. For that there was
needed a better knowledge of Greek than had been possessed by the
Middle Ages. In the fifteenth century Greek scholarship made great
advances and there was enthusiasm for classical learning. Accurate
translations of the Greek works of Galen were made. The printing press
was invented about the middle of the fifteenth century. Towards its end
printed copies of the improved translations began to appear. So it came
about that the Revival of Learning produced a revival of the ancient
scientific knowledge.

This scientific revival led to a new interest in Anatomy. During
the Middle Ages the occasional dissections at the Universities were
merely supposed to illustrate Avicenna and Galen (Fig. 28 and p. 72).
Dissection became much more widely practised in the fifteenth century,
but it was nearly the middle of the sixteenth century before any real
and open discussion of Galen’s views took place in the Universities.

There were, moreover, other influences at work. Along with the revival
of learning there was also a renaissance of art. Some of the great
Renaissance artists--Michelangelo, Raphael and Dürer among them--began
to study the human form very closely. They soon found that to represent
it accurately some knowledge of Anatomy, and especially of the bones
and muscles, was needed. The artists, therefore, began also to dissect.
Among these great artists were some who took more than a purely
artistic interest in the structure and workings of the body. Of these
the most important for us was Leonardo da Vinci (1452-1518). He was a
man of enormously powerful and inquiring mind, and his achievements
in science are at least as remarkable as his works of art. He had
determined to write a text-book of anatomy and physiology. Though he
did not publish it, many of his beautifully illustrated note-books on
these subjects have survived.

Leonardo was the first to question the views of Galen. He made
careful first-hand investigations on the bodies of men and animals,
and performed many physiological experiments. Though a man of the
most lofty genius, centuries ahead of his time, yet his outlook is,
in many respects, typical of his age. His interest in anatomical
investigation is therefore not surprising, for such inquiries were
then astir. It happened that he was particularly interested in the
heart and blood-vessels. He reached the correct conclusion that,
contrary to Galen, the branches of the air-tubes in the lungs do not
come into relation with the heart, but, after branching and gradually
diminishing in size, they finally end _blindly_. He inflated the lungs
with air and found that, whatever the force used, air could not be
driven from the air-tubes into the heart. He therefore inferred quite
correctly that Galen’s _arteria venalis_ (our ‘pulmonary vein’) did not
convey air to the heart, as the followers of Galen believed.

Leonardo then turned to examine the structure and form of the heart
itself. He prepared more accurate drawings of it than had been made
by any before him, making sections and dissections and examining its
valves (Fig. 30). Ultimately he succeeded in grasping the nature and
action of the valves at the root of the great arteries as they arise
from the heart, and he verified his view by remarkable experiments. He
proved that the valves allowed the blood to pass in only one direction,
and prevented its regurgitation. Yet Leonardo gives no complete or
clear description of the action of the heart. He could not emancipate
himself from the old idea of the passage of the blood from the right
ventricle through the septum into the left ventricle (Fig. 21), though
he sometimes seems doubtful about it.



It must be remembered that Leonardo did not publish his researches. It
is only recently that his note-books have become fully accessible. But
although Leonardo’s work remained in manuscript, it must not be assumed
that his views were wholly without effect on his contemporaries. At any
rate, soon after his time the questions that he had raised concerning
the heart and blood-vessels were attracting others and were generally
regarded as forming an important problem needing solution.

The task of writing an anatomical text-book based on direct
observation, to which Leonardo did but put his hand, was achieved by
one who was only four years old at the time when the great artist
died. The central place in the unfolding drama is occupied by Andreas
Vesalius of Brussels (1514-64). This extraordinary man studied first
at the University of Louvain and afterwards at Paris. Anatomical
instruction at these Universities had not improved much, if at all, on
that of the Middle Ages. Vesalius soon tired of hearing long passages
of Galen read out by the professor. He therefore resolved to go to
northern Italy, where newer methods were being practised. Padua was
the place of his choice. He immediately made his mark there, and was
himself appointed professor when only twenty-four years of age. He
established a scientific tradition at Padua which that University has
retained to this day.

No sooner was Vesalius settled at Padua than he applied himself with
unparalleled diligence to lecturing and research. Students crowded
to hear him (Fig. 31). To aid them he issued, in 1538, a short guide
to anatomy and physiology. An examination of this shows that his
physiological views were still those of Galen and Aristotle. After its
issue Vesalius found that Galen and Aristotle were by no means always
to be trusted. The realization of this led him constantly to doubt any
statement by them. His scepticism was sometimes excessive, but it led
him to put every statement made by his predecessors to the test of
experience. This gives his later work an epoch-making value.



During the next four years Vesalius had ampler opportunities to
dissect than he had yet encountered. He devoted a fiery energy to the
preparation of his great work. _The Fabric_ (that is ‘workings’,
compare German ‘Fabrik’) _of the Human Body_ was printed in 1543, a
magnificent and beautifully illustrated volume. It is a landmark in
the History of Science, and a wonderfully full record of a prodigious
number of accurately recorded discoveries and investigations made by a
single observer.

The masterpiece of Vesalius is not only the foundation of modern
Medicine as a science, but the first great positive achievement of
Science itself in modern times. As such it ranks with another work that
appeared in the same year, the treatise of Nicholas Copernicus, _On the
Revolutions of the Celestial Spheres_. The work of Copernicus removed
the Earth from the center of the Universe; that of Vesalius revealed
the real structure of man’s body. Between the two they destroyed for
ever the medieval theories on the subjects of which they treat. But
the work of Copernicus is one of close and subtle reasoning, still
retaining many medieval elements, and is hardly a great exposition
of what we now call the ‘Experimental Method’. The work of Vesalius
far more nearly resembles a modern scientific monograph than does the
treatise of Copernicus.

The achievement of Vesalius was very well received by the scientific
world. Nevertheless, soon after its publication, Vesalius resigned
his professorship to take up the position of a court physician to the
Emperor Charles V, the great monarch of the age. He was then only
twenty-nine years old, but his scientific career was closed.

The edition of the _Fabric_ was soon exhausted, and the demand for
more copies was met by imitations of the work by other hands. At last,
in 1555, Vesalius was induced to issue a second edition. This contains
certain changes in point of view that are important for the subsequent
development of physiology. Vesalius now no longer merely hints his
doubts as to the character of Galen’s physiology; he openly asserts
that he is unable to verify its fundamental bases.

We may take a single instance of this new outspokenness. In his
description of the septum of the heart, he had written in the first
edition:

    ‘The septum of the ventricles of the heart is very dense. It
    abounds with pits on both sides. Of these pits none, so far
    as the senses can perceive, penetrate from the right to the
    left ventricle. We are thus forced to wonder at the art of the
    Creator, by which the blood passes from right to left ventricle
    through pores which elude the sight.’ (Compare Fig. 21, p. 59.)

This passage is altered to something quite different in the second
edition, where he writes:

    ‘Although sometimes these pits are conspicuous, yet none, so
    far as the senses can perceive, passes from the right to the
    left ventricle. I have not come across even the most hidden
    channels by which the septum of the ventricles is pierced. Yet
    such channels are described by teachers of Anatomy, who have
    absolutely decided that the blood is taken from the right to
    the left ventricle. I, however, am in great doubt as to the
    action of the heart in this part.’

He further sets forth his whole policy with reference to Galen’s view
in the following interesting passage:

    ‘In considering the structure of the heart and the use of its
    parts, I bring my words for the most part into agreement with
    the teachings of Galen; not because I think these on every
    point in harmony with the truth, but because, in referring at
    times to new uses and purposes for the parts, I still distrust
    myself. Not long ago I would not have dared to diverge a hair’s
    breadth from Galen’s opinion. But the septum is as thick, dense
    and compact as the rest of the heart. I do not, therefore, see
    how even the smallest particle can be transferred from the
    right to the left ventricle through it. When these and other
    facts are considered, many doubtful matters arise concerning
    the blood-vessels.’

The work terminates with a little chapter _On the dissection of living
animals_. We note that this, while dealing skilfully with the methods
of physiological experiment, does not exhibit any very marked advance
on the views of Galen.

Among the experiments on living animals that Vesalius enumerates are
excision of the spleen, the loss of which he showed was consistent
with life; and the cutting of the nerves that supply the organ of
voice, with resultant loss of that faculty. He demonstrated that
longitudinal section of a muscle interferes little with its function,
but cross section produces disability in proportion to the injury.
Such experiments had been performed by Galen, who had also reached the
same conclusion as Vesalius, that it is through the spinal cord that
the brain acts on the various muscles of the limbs and trunk. Vesalius
repeated Galen’s experiments on section of the spinal cord (p. 58). The
most striking of his experiments were those on respiration. Here he
showed that, even though the chest-wall be pierced, the animal may be
kept alive if the lungs are continuously aerated by means of a bellows,
and that a flagging heart may be revived by similar means.

The work of Vesalius at once placed the knowledge of the human body
in a new position. It cannot be said that he completed the task of
describing the naked-eye structure of the human body. Yet he went so
far towards this that no dramatic improvement has since been made
upon his methods. It is a fair statement that the whole of modern
Descriptive Anatomy may be treated as a comment and correction and
amplification of Vesalius. His work moreover stimulated a host of
investigators.




§ 2. _The Anatomical Reaction on Surgery._

The immediate effect of the new knowledge of Anatomy was an improvement
in Surgery. The Wars of Religion of the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries were fierce and prolonged, and the army surgeons of the time
had much experience of the treatment of wounds. The most prominent of
the military practitioners was the Frenchman, Ambroise Paré (1517-90).
He perceived the importance of anatomical knowledge and adapted his
discoveries to the needs of Surgery. Paré did much to elevate the
surgeon’s profession from a despised handicraft to a position equal to
that of other branches of the healing art.

Apart from the introduction of anatomical discipline into Surgery,
Paré’s four contributions to the surgical art were, firstly, his
discovery that gunshot wounds are not ‘poisonous’ as had theretofore
been thought, and that therefore they do not require the application
of boiling oil, but are best healed by soothing applications;
secondly, the cognate doctrine that bleeding after amputations should
be arrested, not by the terrible method of indiscriminate use of the
red-hot cautery, but by simple ligature; thirdly, his advocacy of
the method of turning the child in its mother’s womb before delivery
in certain abnormal cases; and fourthly, his ingenious devising of
artificial limbs (Fig. 33). None of these four was without precedent.
Nevertheless, the eminence, skill, and wide experience of Paré were
the main factor in the spread of these practices. But the greatest
of all Paré’s contributions to surgery was the service of his own
personality, the example of his steadfast efforts to increase his
knowledge of human anatomy and his skill in the art, and his constant
emphasis on the surgeon’s duty to exert his utmost efforts to avoid or
relieve the patient’s suffering.



In a famous passage Paré describes how he, a ‘freshwater soldier’, on
his first campaign, watched the other surgeons following the old rule
of treating all gunshot wounds with boiling oil. At first he formed
his practice on theirs. The theory was that gunshot wounds contained a
poison, which the boiling oil was believed to drive out. Paré tells of
his agitation when one evening, his supplies having run out, men had to
be treated without the boiling oil. Next morning he was astonished to
find that every man whose wounds had been treated only with a salve had
rested fairly comfortably, while all who had undergone the customary
treatment were, as we may well believe, in great pain. ‘Then I resolved
within myself never so cruelly to burn poor wounded men.’ Another
saying of the shrewd old surgeon is the famous adage ‘I dressed him and
God cured him.’

Paré’s works were frequently reprinted and translated into various
European languages, including English. They exercised the widest
influence on surgical craft in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.
Like Vesalius, he is an example and type of a large class. In every
country surgeons arose who made an effort to utilize the new anatomical
knowledge.


§ 3. _The Renaissance of Internal Medicine._

Internal Medicine lagged behind Surgery at this period. The anatomical
reforms of Vesalius were unaccompanied by any commensurate advance in
physiological knowledge, and without a scientific Physiology there can
be no science of Internal Medicine. The practice of the physicians thus
remained in effect that of the Middle Ages. The ruling idea was still
that of the ‘four humors’ corresponding to the four ‘temperaments’
(Fig. 13, p. 34, and compare Fig. 34, p. 97).

There are, however, three respects in which we see an improvement
of the physician’s art during the sixteenth and first half of the
seventeenth century.

Firstly, there was some improvement in the medical texts that were
habitually read. More reliable translations were now available. Notably
the great Hippocratic works became more widely disseminated. They
formed a substitute for the old texts translated or mistranslated from
the Arabic.

Secondly, the extension of geographical knowledge and the formation
of settlements and colonies brought new drugs upon the market. These
were often a mixed blessing, for some of the drugs were useless and
others dangerous. Nevertheless, to this process Medicine owes several
important contributions, among them Ipecacuanha, Cinchona (p. 326),
and, by no means least, Tobacco (Fig. 35). Apart from the amenities
introduced by Tobacco, it was for long of great value as a narcotic
drug. Moreover, there was a corresponding advance in Botany. The
movement was cursed with the ‘practical’ spirit, and only those plants
thought to have an application as drugs were exactly figured and
described. Nevertheless, the beautifully illustrated herbals of the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries exercised, by the care and accuracy
of their execution, an exemplary influence on the development of
Biological Science in general and of Medical Science in particular.

Thirdly, there was some advance in the knowledge of the natural history
of infectious disease. A rational theory of the nature of infection was
placed before the public as early as 1546 by the Veronese physician,
Girolamo Fracastoro (1483-1553). He regarded infection as due to the
passage of minute bodies from the infector to the infected. These
hypothetical minute bodies had the power of self-multiplication. The
conception bore a superficial resemblance to the modern germ theory of
disease. An important contribution to the conception of epidemics was
also made by the French physician Guillaume de Baillou (1538-1616),
who reintroduced the old Hippocratic idea of ‘Epidemic Constitution’,
i.e. that particular seasons and particular years are of their nature
subject to particular diseases. The idea was extended and developed by
the English physician Thomas Sydenham (1624-89), and it still has its
value.



In connection with their epidemiological work these three men,
Fracastoro, de Baillou, and Sydenham, made significant additions to
the knowledge of particular infectious conditions. Thus, during the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries there arose an exact body of
teaching concerning acute infectious diseases which was the necessary
prelude to the introduction of more effective preventive measures at
a later date. To one infectious disease we may refer more particularly.

During the Middle Ages there had smouldered in various districts an
obscure disease, sometimes more or less dimly distinguished under
various specific names, but most frequently confused with Leprosy.
Towards the end of the fifteenth century this disease, which was still
imperfectly distinguished in men’s minds from Leprosy, broke out in
epidemic and virulent form all over Europe. It caused great destruction
of life and developed everywhere as a problem of national importance.
Various titles were given it, such as ‘pox,’ ‘the French disease’, ‘the
Spanish disorder’. Only tardily was it recognized that the disease
was usually of venereal origin. Not till 1530, on the suggestion of
Fracastoro, did it receive its modern cognomen _Syphilis_. From the
time of its recognition, Syphilis has been pursued by a portentous
mass of literature, the mere sifting and verification of which is a
formidable task. Alarm, misunderstanding, religious feeling, false
modesty, wilful misrepresentation, and change in type of the disease
itself have all contributed their quota of obscurantism and fable to a
naturally difficult subject (Figs. 35 and 36). Fracastoro did something
to bring order out of the confusion. To him also we owe the first good
scientific descriptions of several other destructive diseases, among
which Typhus fever, now known to be conveyed by lice (p. 258), takes a
prominent place.



De Baillou (1538-1616) first described Whooping Cough, and was the
first to use the word _Rheumatism_ in the modern sense. He was moreover
the first, since Hippocrates, to distinguish between Rheumatism and
Gout. De Baillou’s works deeply influenced Sydenham, who held very
similar epidemiological views, and uses a somewhat similar vocabulary
(p. 100).

We have seen how the knowledge of Anatomy forwarded Surgery, while,
with the lag in Physiology, Internal Medicine remained in a backward
state. It is well to recall however that a knowledge of Anatomy and
Physiology will not, of themselves, make a man a scientific physician.
The object which presents itself to a physician is neither a living
anatomy nor a physiological model. It is a sick and suffering patient.
The physician’s first task is to examine exactly the phenomena of
sickness and suffering, and in doing this the first demand on his
knowledge will be the history and fate of others who have endured like
sickness and suffering. When he has ranged these instances in his mind
he may turn, for explanation and relief, to the resources suggested
by other sciences, Anatomy and Physiology among them. But all the
Anatomy and Physiology in the world will not aid the practitioner who
is unacquainted with the natural history of disease. This is the truth
that was firmly seized by Thomas Sydenham.

The Natural History of Disease was a subject which Sydenham pursued
with lifelong devotion. Before his time the phenomena of disease had
been classified, subdivided, discussed, and treated with all the
subtlety and skill of scholastic thought. Men had now and again shaken
themselves free from the shackles of the medieval system, and had
here and there corrected the views of Galen or amplified the limited
achievements of their predecessors. Yet none before Sydenham had set
himself to consider all the actual cases of disease that lay before him
as a subject of scientific description and analysis. That was the great
achievement of the ‘English Hippocrates’. We should not find it easy
to point to any important discovery to associate with his name. But he
did more than discover. He initiated a new mode of approach. He was the
founder of modern Clinical Medicine.

In 1666 Thomas Sydenham published his classic work, _The Method of
Treating Fevers_, dedicated to his friend Robert Boyle, ‘the Father
of Chemistry’ (pp. 124-6). The book opens with the almost Hippocratic
phrase ‘A disease, in my opinion, how prejudicial soever its cause may
be to the body, is no more than a vigorous effort of Nature to throw
off the morbific matter, and thus recover the patient’. We have here
the _healing power of Nature_ of Hippocrates (p. 21), which had been
obscured and overlaid in the twenty centuries which lay between the
two great physicians. The works of Sydenham may reasonably be regarded
as the first great commentary on the Hippocratic theme. Sydenham set
well on its way the conception of infectious conditions as specific
entities, a conception which has since been illuminated by the germ
theory of disease (p. 224 ff.).




§ 4. _The First Physical Synthesis._

Manifestations of the Human Spirit are not accustomed to confine
themselves exactly within the convenient limits of the centuries.
Nevertheless, it happens that in the History of Science the year 1600
does, in fact, correspond to something of the character of a real
change in the current attitude to Nature. That year really ushers in
the era of physical experiment. The last of the great transitional
thinkers who mark the waning of Renaissance philosophy was Giordano
Bruno, the martyr of science.

Giordano Bruno (1548-1600), who was no practical scientist, had eagerly
incorporated into his often fantastic philosophy the ill-worked-out
conclusions of Copernicus (p. 88). Nominally adopting the Copernican
theory, he modified it fundamentally. Copernicus, having placed the Sun
at the center of the World, and made the Earth and other planets circle
round it, had still left the stars at a fixed and definite distance, as
had the ancient astronomers. The limitation of the sphere of the fixed
stars was obnoxious to Giordano, and he removed the boundaries of the
Universe to an infinite distance, in accordance with the principles
of his philosophy. The change may seem unimportant save for astronomy,
but, in fact, it came to influence every department of scientific
thought, for the endlessness of Nature is implicit in the modern
scientific attitude.

Giordano was burned at the stake at Rome, after seven years’
imprisonment, in 1600. In the same year the experimental era was
ushered in with the work of William Gilbert (1544-1603), _On the
Magnet_, in which he not only demonstrates experimentally the
properties of magnets but also shows that the Earth itself is a magnet.
In the same year, too, Tycho Brahe (1546-1601) handed over the torch to
Johannes Kepler. Tycho was the last of the older astronomers who worked
on the Aristotelian view of circular and uniform movements of heavenly
bodies. Kepler was the real founder of the modern astronomical system.
The period from 1600 onward lies with new men, Galileo (1564-1642) and
Kepler (1571-1630) among astronomers and physicists, Harvey (1578-1657)
among biologists, Descartes (1596-1650) among philosophers.

The seventeenth century opened with an extraordinary wealth of
scientific discovery. As we glance at the mass of fundamental work
produced during that period, we perceive the major departments of
Science, as we know them to-day, becoming clearly differentiated.
The acceptance of Observation and Experiment as the only method of
eliciting the Laws of Nature reaches an ever-widening circle. Even
to enumerate the names of the seventeenth-century pioneers would be
a formidable task. The sciences penetrated to the Universities and
influenced the curricula. The number of scientific men became so large
and so influential that separate organizations were formed by them in
the interests of their studies. It is the age of the foundation of the
‘Academies’, of which the English Royal Society is a type.

From the multitude of workers on these subjects we can but select a few
names. In the first half of the century Galileo and Kepler are the main
exponents of natural law. Descartes takes his place here as the first
since antiquity who sought to explain the phenomenal universe on a
unitary basis. In the second half of the period comes the mighty figure
of Newton, whose researches ushered in that phase in our story in which
we live to-day.

The early training of Galileo Galilei had been scholastic and
Aristotelian. By 1590, however, he had begun to doubt, and was making
experiments on the rate of acceleration of falling bodies. His
conclusions were demonstrated in 1591 from the leaning tower of Pisa.
By that famous experiment he showed, in the most public manner, the
error of the Aristotelian view that the rate of fall was a function not
of the weight of the object but of the period of fall. Revolutionary
also was Galileo’s work of 1604. In that year a new star appeared in
the constellation _Serpentarius_. He demonstrated that this star was
situated beyond the planets and among the remote heavenly bodies.
Now this remote region was regarded in the Aristotelian scheme
as absolutely changeless. Although new stars had been previously
noticed, they had been considered to belong to the lower and less
perfect regions nearer to earth. To the same lower region, according
to the then current theory, belonged such temporary and rapidly
changing bodies as meteors and comets. But Galileo had attacked the
incorruptible and unchangeable heavens.

In 1609 Galileo made accessible two instruments that were to have a
deep influence on the subsequent development of Science, the Telescope
and Microscope. It is with the former instrument that his name is most
frequently associated. His first discoveries made by means of the
Telescope were issued in 1610. That year was crowded with important
observations especially on the inner planets and notably on Venus. It
had been rightly claimed in criticizing the Copernican hypothesis that,
if the planets resemble the Earth in revolving round the Sun, only such
parts of them should be luminous as are exposed to the Sun’s rays. In
other words, they should exhibit phases like the Moon. Such phases in
Venus were now actually observed by Galileo. In the following year he
described sunspots and traced them round the Sun’s disk.

We need not follow the further astronomical observations of Galileo,
nor need we discuss the contest with the older school on which he
embarked. It is sufficient to remind ourselves that the appearance
of a new star, the behavior of the rings of Saturn, the observations
of the phases of Venus and of the Sun’s spots, struck a blow at the
Aristotelian astronomy comparable to that delivered against the
Aristotelian physics by the falling weights from the leaning tower of
Pisa. Aristotelian astronomy demanded heavens eternally changeless.
Here were changes and new appearances in the heavens, clearly visible
to all who would see.

During these years too, Galileo was laying firm the foundations of the
science of Mechanics. Out of his mechanical researches came a new way
of looking at the objects of Nature which has profoundly influenced
the entire subsequent course of science. That way is best expressed
in Galileo’s own words, which place him among the philosophers whose
thought influences all those who deal with scientific themes.

    ‘As soon as I form a conception of a material or corporeal
    substance, I simultaneously feel the necessity of conceiving
    that it has boundaries and is of some shape or other; that
    relatively to others it is great or small; that it is in this
    or that place, in this or that time; that it is in motion or
    at rest; that it touches, or does not touch, another body;
    that it is unique, rare, or common; nor can I, by any act of
    imagination, disjoin it from these qualities. But I do not find
    myself absolutely compelled to apprehend it as necessarily
    accompanied by such conditions as that it must be white or
    red, bitter or sweet, sonorous or silent, smelling sweetly
    or disagreeably; and if the senses had not pointed out these
    qualities language and imagination alone could never have
    arrived at them. Therefore I think that these tastes, smells,
    colors, &c., with regard to the object in which they appear to
    reside, are nothing more than mere names. They exist only in
    the sensitive body, for when the living creature is removed
    all these qualities are carried off and annihilated, although
    we have imposed particular names upon them, and would fain
    persuade ourselves that they truly and in fact exist. I do
    not believe that there exists anything in external bodies for
    exciting tastes, smells and sounds, &c., except size, shape,
    quantity, and motion. If ears, tongues, and noses were removed,
    I am of opinion that shape, quantity, and motion would remain,
    but there would be an end of smells, tastes, and sounds, which
    abstractedly from the living creature I take to be mere words.’

This passage is a veritable Charter of Science. From Galileo’s day to
ours, men of science have occupied

themselves in measuring size, shape, quantity, and motion, the
‘primary qualities’, and expressing their knowledge in that measured
form. They have relegated colors, smells, tastes, sounds, and other
sense-impressions to the position of ‘secondary qualities’, and have
tried to express them, when they express them at all, in terms of the
primary qualities. We need not enter on the philosophical discussion
as to how far the primary qualities are in truth more real than the
secondary, but it is a fact that, since the time of Galileo, Science
has come to be regarded more and more widely as an exact process.
_Science is Measurement._ It is a conception that has affected the
medical no less than the other sciences, and it is a conception that
Medicine, for good or ill, owes to Galileo.




§ 5. _The Revival of Physiology._

The first to apply Galilean principles of measurement to biological
matters was Sanctorius (1561-1636), a professor at Padua. He described
a thermometer for use in taking the temperature of the human body
(Figs. 39 and 40), and an apparatus for comparing the rate of pulse
beats (Fig. 41). Both these he modified from devices suggested by
Galileo (Fig. 38). It is an indication of the transitional character
of the Science of the time that he describes these instruments in a
commentary on a medieval translation of the _Canon_ of Avicenna (p.
67). He also sought to compare the weight of the body at different
times and in different circumstances. In the process of doing this, he
demonstrated that the body loses weight by mere exposure, a process
which he ascribed to ‘insensible perspiration’ (Fig. 37). By these
experiments he laid the foundation of the modern study of ‘Metabolism’
(p. 220).



While Sanctorius was engaged in this pioneer work at Padua, the
movement that Vesalius had inaugurated there was making further
conquests in the purely biological line. Vesalius had been succeeded
at Padua by a series of anatomists of great eminence. Perhaps the
most prominent among these was Jerome Fabricius (1537-1619), usually
called ‘of Aquapendente’, after the small Tuscan village where he
was born. This Fabricius of Aquapendente taught at Padua for over
fifty years, from 1565 till his death at eighty-two in 1619. He made
many contributions to the advancement of anatomy, most of which had
physiological bearings. Thus, he was the effective founder of modern
embryology and the author of the first illustrated work on that
subject, in which he describes the formation of the chick in the egg.
He was the first to give accurate figures of the structure of the
eye. He developed the mechanics of muscular motion. He added to his
qualities as an observer the power of attracting younger men.

In spite of all his powers, however, Fabricius never shook himself free
from ancient views, and especially he was steeped in the theories of
Aristotle and Galen. This backward-looking habit prevented his work
from being as important as it might otherwise have been. In connection
with the circulation, for instance, he made a striking discovery, but
wholly failed to draw out its most important lesson.



In 1600 he published his book, _On the Valves of the Veins_. In it he
says that these structures are so placed that their mouths are always
directed _toward_ the heart (Fig. 42), yet he never gets an inkling
that the effect of these valves must be to prevent blood flowing
into the veins except toward the heart. He is too set on the old
Galenic physiology to permit such a revolutionary thought. The real
importance of Fabricius is, therefore, not so much as an investigator
but rather as a teacher, a capacity in which he shone above all other
physiologists for generations to come. He would deserve our remembrance
if only as the master of the discoverer of the circulation of the
blood, William Harvey.

The Englishman, William Harvey (1578-1657), after education at
Cambridge, went to Padua in 1599, when Fabricius was at the height
of his powers. Returning to England in 1602, he set up in practice
in London. During the years which followed, he was dissecting and
experimenting very industriously, and by 1615 had reached a clear
conception of the circulation of the blood (Fig. 43), though he did not
publish his discovery till some thirteen years later.

To discuss the actual steps by which Harvey made his discovery
would be beyond our scope. He had, however, been well trained in
experimenting on living animals by Fabricius, and had read widely in
anatomical literature. He was of a contemplative turn of mind and
his quiet and cautious temper, united with his enthusiasm and skill
as an experimenter, provided a superb mental equipment for a life of
scientific investigation.

Harvey, early in his work, reached two fundamental conceptions
concerning the vascular system. He perceived that the valves in the
veins would permit the blood to pass only towards the heart (Fig.
43), while those in the great arteries arising from the heart would
permit the blood to pass only away from the heart. In connection with
the movement of the blood, Harvey’s crucial point is that it must be
_continuous_, and _always in one direction_. This really clinches
the matter, for consider the capacity of the heart. Let us suppose
that either ventricle holds but 2 ounces of blood. The pulse beats 72
times a minute and 72 × 60 times an hour. In the course of one hour,
therefore, the left ventricle will throw into the aorta, or the right
ventricle into the pulmonary artery, no less than 72 × 60 × 2 = 8,640
ounces = 38 stones 8 lb. In other words, in one hour the ventricle will
throw into the great artery more than three times the body weight of
a heavy man. Where can all this blood come from? Whither can it all
go? It cannot come from the ingested food and drink, for no one could
consume so much in one hour! It cannot reach and remain in the tissues,
for they would soon all burst and ooze with blood! The solution of the
puzzle, Harvey came to see, is that it is the same blood that is always
being pumped into the arteries, and the same blood that is always
coming back through the veins. In other words the blood _circulates_, a
fact which Harvey proceeded to demonstrate with convincing thoroughness
(Fig. 43).



We may note that, though Harvey demonstrated the existence of the
circulation, he was never able to follow it throughout, for he did not
see the capillary vessels by which the blood is conveyed from the
terminal branches of the arteries to the smallest tributaries of the
veins. These were first demonstrated by Malpighi (p. 116).

The knowledge of the circulation of the blood has been the basis of
the whole of modern Physiology and with it of the whole of modern
rational Medicine. The attitude of Galen and Aristotle towards the
heart and the great vessels passed into the shadow. The blood, it was
seen, is a carrier always going round and round on the same beat. What
it carries, and why, how and where it takes up its loads, and how,
where, and why it parts with them, these are questions the answering
of which has been the main task of Physiology in the centuries that
have followed. As each of the questions has obtained a more and more
rational answer, so clinical Medicine has always made a step forward,
and has come to approach more nearly to a true science. Thus it is that
the work of Harvey lies at the back of almost every important medical
advance.




§ 6. _Microscopic Analysis of the Animal Body._

The compound microscope was first made into an effective instrument by
Galileo. It was, as it were, a _by-product_ of his invention of the
telescope. With that instrument he had seen enough to convince himself
that the movement of the Sun round the Earth was but an appearance.
At the very time that Harvey was giving his first course of lectures
securely in London, Galileo’s teaching was attracting the unwelcome
attention of the Inquisition in Rome.

Galileo’s microscopes, however, were far less satisfactory than his
telescopes. For optical reasons which we need not discuss, these early
compound microscopes failed to give a clear picture. With any high
degree of magnification, the image was always blurred and distorted.
More than three centuries were to pass before a better compound system
was introduced. But about 1650 a way was found of constructing and
mounting simple lenses of very high power. Many of the most important
microscopical discoveries of the second half of the seventeenth
century were, therefore, made with a simple lens. This was notably
the case with much of the work of the great investigators Malpighi and
Leeuwenhoek (Fig. 49 A).



Marcello Malpighi (1628-94) was born in the year in which Harvey’s work
was published. He became a professor at Bologna, having early developed
great skill in minute investigation. His first work, which appeared in
1661, supplied the element missing in the investigations of Harvey,
for he describes the actual passage of blood from the arteries to the
veins through the ‘capillary’ blood-vessels (Fig. 45). Harvey, who
did not use a microscope, knew nothing of the capillaries. The object
which yielded up the secret was the lung of the frog. This organ in the
frog happens to be almost transparent, is very simple in structure,
and is furnished on its surface with particularly conspicuous capillary
vessels. Malpighi could hardly have selected an object better suited
for this particular research. This important discovery of his drew the
attention of scientific men in England. The Royal Society soon entered
into correspondence with him, and during the remainder of his life
undertook the publication of his researches.





The contributions of Malpighi to biological knowledge were very
numerous and important. The study of early development, embryology as
it is now called, was greatly extended by him. The later stages of
embryological development had been investigated by Fabricius (p. 110)
and some additions to the subject had been made by Harvey. Malpighi,
applying his microscope to the earlier germ of the animal body,
described in detail the development of the organs, notably of the
heart and the nervous system (Figs. 46-49). He also demonstrated the
minute structure of the skin, spleen and liver, in all of which there
are anatomical structures that still bear his name. He investigated
microscopically the structure and physiology of insects and plants, and
his figures of the cell-walls of the latter are good and clear.



A most remarkable contemporary microscopist was the Dutchman, Anthony
van Leeuwenhoek (1632-1723). Without medical or scientific training,
desultory and secretive in his mode of working, he was withal an
observer of genius and a very shrewd investigator. During his long
and industrious life he made a series of disconnected discoveries
which for originality and importance have been surpassed by no other
microscopic observer. He improved and extended the knowledge of the
capillary circulation of which Malpighi was the discoverer (Fig. 53),
he gave figures of the blood corpuscles (Figs. 50-1), of spermatozoa
and of fibres of muscles (Figs. 55-56a), and advanced the knowledge of
embryology. He always worked with a simple microscope, using lenses of
exceedingly short focal length (Fig. 49A). It is astounding that, with
such an instrument, he saw and figured bacteria as early as 1683 (Fig.
54).





The short life of a second Dutch microscopist of the seventeenth
century, Jan Jacobz Swammerdam (1637-80), was abbreviated yet further,
as regards scientific achievement, by his insanity. In his brief
working period he produced his _Bible of Nature_ which, alone of
the scientific writings of his age, is still consulted by modern
naturalists for the unique beauty and accuracy of its figures.
He extended the knowledge of embryology and he made a series of
physiological experiments which involved the very modern physiological
device known as the ‘nerve-muscle preparation’. He is thus the founder
of an important department of Physiology. Swammerdam showed that,
during contraction, a muscle does not increase in bulk, and that
therefore the nerve brings nothing to it in the way of the hypothetical
‘nervous fluid’ in which many then believed (Fig. 63). He applied the
same reasoning to the heart (Figs. 57-60). Swammerdam was perhaps the
first to see the blood corpuscles. Like several of his contemporaries
and followers, he made injection preparations of much beauty and
delicacy. His great work was not published till after his death. The
copper plates that he had prepared for it were found and purchased by
Boerhaave (p. 140), who produced them at his own expense.

These microscopists and several others in the seventeenth century
did much to explore the minute structure of the animal body. Their
revelations showed at once an unexpected complexity of all the parts,
and an unexpected resemblance of some of those parts which appear
diverse to the naked eye. Thus, the structure of the body came to be
subjected to a process that we may call ‘microscopic analysis’. For
long after the time of these classical microscopists no effective
improvements were made in the microscope, and the progress of
microscopic analysis lay almost dormant. With the improvements in the
microscope of the nineteenth century, the method was taken up again
with triumphant results.




§ 7. _From Alchemy to Chemistry._

During the sixteenth and the first part of the seventeenth century
the basic science of Mechanics had been placed on a firm footing
by Galileo. Astronomy, with Galileo and Kepler, had made the great
break with the past. Anatomy and Physiology had put on their modern
dress. Chemical knowledge, however, remained peculiarly backward.
Many advances, it is true, had been made in technical processes,
but investigations designed to throw light on theory were mostly
prosecuted by the band of dupes and charlatans who, since the Middle
Ages, had been seeking the Philosopher’s Stone. The old theory of the
four elements, earth, air, fire, and water (p. 34), formed an ill basis
for experiment. Some philosophers, it is true, had put forward crude
atomic theories, but they had little experimental evidence to adduce.
Nevertheless even the alchemists had made some advance and had, for
instance, perfected a system of weighing.

The great defect of the ancient view of matter was that it contained
no definite conception of the nature of a _pure_ substance. Metals,
for instance, were regarded, like other substances, as a mixture
in certain proportions of the four elements of Aristotle (p. 34).
Thus, the transmutation of one metal or one substance into another
by distillation did not seem an absurdity, or even a task of special
theoretical difficulty.

The main agent in changing the chemical outlook was Robert Boyle
(1627-91). He was a member of a small association of scientific men,
the _Invisible College_, which met first in London, then in Oxford,
and finally in 1663 was incorporated by Royal Charter as the _Royal
Society_. These men were satisfied that the only way to learn anything
effective about Nature was by observation and experiment. From their
discussions all purely speculative views were excluded. They agreed
to meet together solely to compare experiences, to demonstrate
experiments, and to draw immediate deductions. None of them was more
active in these matters than Boyle.

The actual chemical and physical discoveries of Boyle were very
numerous, but his great achievement, the real service he rendered to
learning in general and to medicine in particular, was his introduction
of a new spirit into Chemistry. Under him that study was no longer
prosecuted for purely practical ends; it was set free from the mystic
factor in Alchemy and it was loosed from the chains which bound it
to Medicine, to the disadvantage of both. Chemistry thus became an
independent science, the principles of which were to be ascertained by
experiment, and its truths pursued for their own sake.

Boyle demonstrated that the air is a material substance and has weight.
By means of his air-pump, he proved clearly that this substance is
necessary for the support of respiration (Fig. 63). The law of the
compressibility of gases is still known by his name. Most important of
all Boyle’s contributions to chemical theory was his adumbration of the
conception of a chemical element in our modern sense, and his view,
which he borrowed from another philosopher, of the atomic structure of
matter.

Under the inspiration of Boyle and his colleagues, chemical works
of the second half of the seventeenth century exhibit in general a
positive, cautious, experimental spirit, and show a great contrast to
the mystical and obscure writings of the first half of the century,
which have much affinity with Alchemy. A fine exponent of this new
spirit was John Mayow (1645-79), who was prevented by an early death
from fulfilling all his promise. He was the first to recognize clearly
that there is a substance or principle in air which is concerned at
once with combustion, respiration, and the conversion of venous into
arterial blood. In this sense he was the discoverer of Oxygen (Figs. 74
and 75).




§ 8. _The Medical Theorists._

The great advances in the physical and biological sciences, instituted
during the sixteenth and seventeenth century, left the old medical
theories derelict. We have already traced the wrecking of the
Galenic physiology. With its destruction, the old ideas concerning
the three types of spirit, natural, vital, and animal, went by the
board. The doctrine of the circulation of the blood (p. 113) and the
investigations of the new Chemistry accorded ill with the old humoral
pathology, which ascribed all disease to excess or defect of one of
the four humors, blood, phlegm, bile, and melancholy (p. 34). Numerous
fresh theories arose, of which the more important can be classed under
the three headings _Iatrophysics_, _Iatrochemistry_, and _Vitalism_.


(_a_) _Iatrophysics._

The physical discoveries of Galileo and the demonstrations of
Sanctorius (p. 108) and of Harvey (p. 111) gave a great impetus to the
attempt to explain the workings of the animal body on purely mechanical
grounds. The writers who took this point of view are known as the
_Iatrophysicists_. One of the earliest and most impressive exponents of
physiological theory along these lines was the French philosopher René
Descartes (1596-1650). His work on the subject appeared posthumously in
1662. It is important as the first modern book entirely devoted to the
subject of Physiology.

Descartes had not himself any extensive practical knowledge of the
subject with which he was dealing. On theoretical grounds he set
forth a very complicated apparatus which he believes to be a model
of animal structure. Subsequent investigation failed to confirm his
findings, and his work soon passed into oblivion. For a time, however,
it attracted much attention and many followers. A strong point in his
theory is the great stress laid upon the nervous system, and its power
of co-ordinating the different bodily activities. Thus stated, his view
may seem not far from the modern standpoint, though in fact he was
grotesquely wrong in detail. An important part of his theory is the
complete separation of Man from all the other animals. Man, according
to him, differs from all other animals by his possession of a soul,
which is situated in a structure in the brain known to physiologists
as the ‘pineal body’! Animals, he held, have no soul, and all their
actions and movements, even those which seem to express pain or fear,
are purely automatic. It is the modern theory of ‘behaviorism’ with
man excluded! (Figs. 62 and 63.)





More lasting was the achievement of Giovanni Alfonso Borelli
(1608-79), an eminent mathematician who was professor at several
Italian universities and the friend of Galileo and Malpighi. Stirred,
like Descartes, by the success of Galileo in giving a mathematical
expression to mechanical events, Borelli attempted to do the same with
the animal body. In this undertaking he was, in fact, very successful.
That department of Physiology which treats of muscular movement on
mechanical principles was effectively founded and largely developed by
him. Here his mathematical and physical training was specially useful.
He endeavored, with some success, to extend mechanical principles to
such movements as the flight of birds and the swimming of fish. When he
came to an analysis of some of the other activities of the body, such
as the action of the heart, or the movements of the intestines, he was
less successful, and he naturally failed altogether in his attempt to
introduce mechanical ideas in explanation of what we now know to be
chemical processes, such as digestion in the stomach.

Undeterred by Borelli’s failure, other writers sought to find
mechanical explanations of physical processes. As is usual in such
cases, the amount of theory was inversely proportional to the amount
of knowledge. The views of some of the later ‘Iatrophysicists’ became
very fantastic. Belated representatives of the school are the writers
of the great French _Encyclopédie_ (1751-72), and notably its main
author, the man of letters, Denis Diderot (1713-84).




(_b_) _Iatrochemistry._

Just as there were some who sought to explain all animal activity on
a mechanical basis so others resorted to chemical interpretation.
These may be termed _Iatrochemists_. The most prominent was Franciscus
Sylvius (1614-72), professor of Medicine at Leyden. That university
had become, in the second half of the seventeenth century, the most
progressive scientific center north of the Alps. It was the seat of the
first University laboratory, built at the instigation of Sylvius.

Sylvius devoted much attention to the study of salts. He recognized
that they were the result of the union of acids and bases, and he
attained to the idea of chemical affinity--an important advance. He
looked at the phenomena of life also from the chemical point of view.
Well abreast of the anatomical knowledge of his day, and accepting
the broader lines of mechanistic advance in Biology, such as the
circulation of the blood and the mechanics of muscular motion, Sylvius
sought to interpret other activities in chemical terms. His position
and abilities as a teacher gave his views wide currency and he and his
pupils occupy a large part of the field of medical theory until well
into the eighteenth century.

Under the influence of this school, almost all forms of vital activity
were expressed in terms of ‘acid and alkali’ and of ‘fermentation’.
The latter process was assumed to be of a chemical order, and no
clear distinction was made between changes that are brought about by
‘unorganized’ ferments, such as gastric juice or rennet, and changes
that are brought about by the action of micro-organisms, such as
alcoholic fermentation or leavening by yeast. Nevertheless, the school
of Sylvius and its immediate successors added considerably to our
knowledge of physiological processes, notably by their examination of
the body fluids, especially the digestive fluids such as the saliva,
and the secretions of the stomach and of the pancreas.




(_c_) _Vitalism._

Yet another school of medical theorists arose under the leadership of
the German chemist and physician, George Ernest Stahl (1660-1734).
Stahl is best remembered as the author of the famous theory of
_phlogiston_, a hypothetical substance with which bodies were supposed
to part during the process of burning (p. 151). He is important in the
history of science for his success in grouping chemical phenomena and
therefore in systematizing the study of the subject. For our purpose,
however, Stahl stands as the protagonist of that view of the nature of
the organism which now goes under the term _Vitalism_. Though expressed
by him in obscure and mystical language, it is, in effect, a return to
the Aristotelian position and a denial of the view of Descartes. To
Descartes the animal body was a machine. To Stahl the word _machine_
expressed exactly what the animal body was not. The phenomena
characteristic of the living body are, he considered, not governed by
physical and chemical laws, but by laws of a wholly different kind.
These laws are the laws of the _sensitive soul_. The _sensitive soul_
of Stahl is, in its ultimate analysis, not dissimilar to the _psyche_
of Aristotle (p. 32). Stahl held that the immediate instruments, the
natural slaves of this sensitive soul, were chemical processes and his
Physiology develops along lines of which Aristotle could know nothing.
This does not, however, alter the fact of his hypothesis being an
essentially vitalistic one of Aristotelian origin.

    *   *    *    *    *

The language and the theories of the Iatrophysicists, the
Iatrochemists, and the Vitalists of the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries have long been discarded by men of science in the form in
which they were originally propounded. Nevertheless, they represent
three attitudes to the activities of living things which have present
and current meaning. Each seems to present some aspect of truth.
Whether some physiological thinker will combine all three aspects into
one coherent whole, it is for the future to decide. Yet it is certain
that all three lines of approach remain of value, and the stimulus
provided by each of the three inspires investigation at the present
day. In this sense we enter on the period of modern Medicine in the
seventeenth century. In this sense the foundations of modern rational
Medicine may be said to have been laid by Borelli, Sylvius and Stahl,
with Galileo, Boyle and Harvey standing behind them.




V

THE PERIOD OF CONSOLIDATION

(FROM ABOUT 1700 TO ABOUT 1825)


§ 1. _The Reign of Law._

During the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries the human mind cast
off its medieval vestments and, having refreshed itself at the spring
of Antiquity, turned to array itself in the garments of the New
Philosophy. The advent of new ideas and new knowledge had been very
rapid. The _method_ of Research had been determined by Galileo at the
beginning of the seventeenth century. The _meaning_ of Research was
determined by a second great investigator, Newton, at the end of the
same century.

The change wrought in the thought of their time by Vesalius, Galileo,
Harvey and their like was quantitative rather than qualitative. They
discovered new laws of Nature, but the discovery of such new laws was
hardly unprecedented. Law had been traced in the heavens from of old.
The rules of planetary and stellar motion had been gradually developed
from the simple astronomical theories of the ancients. The great
astronomers of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries did not hesitate
to appeal to the records and doctrines of medieval writers, for new
mathematical relationships of the heavenly bodies had been elicited
even during the Middle Ages. In the sixteenth century Astronomy under
Tycho (died 1601) put her house in order for the ‘Great Instauration’
of the coming age. And then Galileo startled the world (1604) with that
new star of his (p. 104), among the most remote heavenly bodies in the
very region held by the Aristotelian and Platonic schemes to be utterly
changeless. The Revolution in Thought had begun, though no new order
had been established.

By 1618 Kepler had enunciated his ‘three laws of planetary motion’,
bringing these movements into an intelligible relation with each other.
Then the experimental philosophers set forth to establish terrestrial
mechanics. They determined the mode of action of gravitation, and
Galileo came near to the ‘three laws of motion’ which we call Newton’s.
But it was Newton who first affirmed them clearly and succeeded in
linking them with Kepler’s laws of planetary motion. Before Newton, no
man had shown or perceived that rule by which the natural succession of
earthly phenomena is in relation to that of the heavenly bodies. Nay,
Faith and Reason alike would have been against such a view. To prove
that the relationship amounted to identity, to move men’s minds to see
that the force that causes the stone to fall is that which keeps the
planets in their path, this was Newton’s unique achievement. It was
Newton who first enunciated a law whose writ ran alike in the Heavens
and on the Earth. With Newton the Universe acquired an independent
rationality, and the whole cosmology of Aristotle, of Galen, and of the
Middle Ages lay in the dust.

When Newton had completed his work, the Gravitation of the Earth and of
the Heavens was seen to be one, and all the Mechanism of the Universe
lay spread before him. The vision was set forth in his _Principia_
(1687). It established a view of the structure and working of the
Universe which has survived to our own generation.

And now as to the change wrought in men’s minds. It was something more
than a Revolution. It was the establishment of a New Order. Newton
conceived a working Universe wholly independent of the Spiritual Order.
As to how far his vision is philosophically tenable and as to how far
he realized its nature, these are matters which we need not discuss
here. There can, however, be no doubt that Newton utterly destroyed the
very foundations of medieval thought. With Newton there sets in the
last stage of ‘scientific determinism’.

During the two centuries and a half since the _Principia_ appeared,
Science has developed prodigiously along the lines into which Newton
led her. In reliance on the universality of Natural Law, the stars in
their courses have been paced, weighed, measured, analysed. The same
process, directed to our own planet, has traced its history, determined
its composition, demonstrated its relation to other bodies. Physicist
and chemist have suggested a structure in terrestrial matter similar
to that of the stars and suns. The world has been reduced to a unitary
system. Wherever men have sought Law, they have found Law. With search
skilful enough and patient enough, Law has ever emerged. It has been
_the Age of the Reign of Law_.

It is true that in our own time philosophers in general have come to
see that these Laws of Nature are within us as much as without; that
they are, in part at least, the result of the structure of our minds.
This is a point of view, however, which has not affected, and perhaps
will not affect, the working man of science. His constant occupation,
since the days of Newton, has been the pursuit of Law, and he has
always been satisfied that Law has only to be sought in order to be
found. This conception has affected the medical and biological sciences
very deeply. Thus the influence of the Newtonian philosophy is as
traceable in them as it is in the astronomical and physical sciences.
Galileo showed men of science that weighing and measuring are worth
while. Newton convinced a large proportion of them that weighing and
measuring are the _only_ investigations that are worth while. The
question as to whether this view is ultimately true or philosophically
justifiable does not need discussion at the moment. The point, for our
immediate purpose, is that the view has been and is very widely held.


§ 2. _The Rise of Clinical Teaching._

The eighteenth century dawned with the refreshing breeze of Newtonian
philosophy blowing through it. During the previous two hundred years
there had been an immense amount of new and fruitful research along
diverse lines. Chemistry and Mechanics, Botany and Comparative
Anatomy, Descriptive Anatomy and Experimental Physiology, Epidemiology
and Microscopic Analysis, all had yielded startling results. The
new generation was bewildered with the very mass and novelty of the
material. The Biologists of the time must have been well nigh hopeless
of reducing their vast accumulations to order, when they contemplated
the beauty and symmetry of the mathematical relations that Newton
and his followers had introduced into Cosmic conceptions. Thus the
eighteenth century is a period for Biology of pause and consolidation
during which attempts were made to introduce unitary conceptions
into the mass of accumulated material. It was, moreover, a period of
consolidation not only of ideas but also of teaching. These tasks
at first turned men’s minds away from the immediate accumulation of
further knowledge. So it is that the first half of the eighteenth
century exhibits something of a gap in the progress of Research. The
medical field is largely filled by two great figures, Boerhaave and
Haller.

Until the seventeenth century there was no systematic clinical
teaching. The Universities gave medical degrees on the basis of a
spoken disputation. No contact with the patient was demanded. The
first effective attempt to change this was at Leyden, where about 1636
clinical teaching was instituted. Owing to this, and to the fact that,
as at Padua, students of every religious denomination were accepted,
Leyden became much frequented by foreign and especially by Protestant
students. The attractions of the place were increased by Sylvius (pp.
131-2) who, in the second half of the seventeenth century, added
laboratory instruction to his clinical teaching. Leyden had several
eminent anatomists, while its botanic garden and museums added to the
practical character of the medical instruction that it offered.

Hermann Boerhaave (1668-1738) was first appointed as a teacher at
Leyden in 1701. At once the medical school attained a front rank
reputation which rapidly came to surpass even that of Padua. Boerhaave
had very few beds at his disposal, but never did man make better
use of his opportunities. Besides clinical, chemical, botanical
and anatomical instruction he followed such of his patients as died
into the post-mortem room and there demonstrated to his students the
relation of lesions to symptoms. He is thus the introducer of the
method of medical instruction still in vogue in our modern medical
schools.

Boerhaave was a man of wide culture. He rescued and published the
plates of the priceless _Bible of Nature_ of Swammerdam (p. 121). He
brought to Leyden the best anatomist of his age, Bernard Siegfried
Albinus (1697-1770). With him Boerhaave edited in superb form the
collected works of Vesalius (1725, p. 85 ff.). The edition exhibits
remarkable prevision of the scientific needs of the scholarship of
our own time. To Albinus, and indirectly to Boerhaave, we owe the
most beautiful of all works on muscular anatomy (1747), a book still
in current use (Fig. 66). Apart from his clinical ability and acumen
Boerhaave was a skilled chemist, botanist, and anatomist.

With all these accomplishments Boerhaave was better able than any man
of his time to achieve something like a medical synthesis, to bring
all the sciences to the service of the patient. Taking one thing
with another, considering his influence as a teacher, his clinical
acumen, his power of inspiring younger workers, his wide learning,
his balanced vision, his eagerness for new knowledge, his sanity, his
humanity, his generosity, and his prophetic power, Boerhaave must
be regarded as the greatest physician of modern times. To him the
debt of British Medicine, and through it of British well-being, is
quite incalculable. Through his pupils he is the real founder of the
Edinburgh Medical School, and through it of the best medical teaching
in the English-speaking countries of the world. The success of the
Edinburgh school, founded while the great Leyden professor was still in
his prime, can be ascribed to two causes which are perhaps reducible to
one--the inspiration of Boerhaave. These two causes are, firstly, the
enthusiasm of its early teachers, and, secondly, the concentration of
all the medical teaching, both clinical and subsidiary, in one great
university school.




§ 3. _Physiology passes to the Modern Stage._

The only figure in the eighteenth century whose influence is comparable
to that of Boerhaave is his pupil, the Swiss Albrecht von Haller
(1708-77), one of the most accomplished men of all time. In actual
scientific achievement Haller stands, indeed, far above his master.
He achieved distinction as poet, botanist, anatomist, and novelist,
carried on a prodigious correspondence, was an exceedingly learned
bibliographer, and perhaps the most voluminous of all scientific
authors. His special distinction, however, is as a physiologist.

Haller’s great work, _Elements of the Physiology of the Human Body_
(1759-66), marks the modernization of the subject of which it treats.
Of the highest importance were his researches on the Mechanics of
Respiration, on the formation of bone, and on the development of the
embryo. He did good work on the action of the digestive juices. His
most important contributions, however, are his conceptions of the
nature of living substance and of the action of the nervous system.
These conceptions formed the main background of biological thinking
for a hundred years, and are still integral parts of physiological
doctrine.

All departments of Medicine must be influenced by the views we may hold
on the nature and action of the nervous system, just as all parts of
the body are influenced and indeed are linked together by that system.
Thus the growth in knowledge of the physiology of the nervous system is
extremely important to us if we would gain a true idea of the progress
of Rational Medicine.

When we look into the history of nervous Physiology before Haller, we
shall be struck by the smallness of the observational foundation of a
vast speculative structure. That we may be the more charitable in our
judgment of such fanciful developments, we may recall that the Mind is
so constructed that it can take little interest in the accumulation of
instances unless it can adduce general laws therefrom. Theory is thus
as necessary to practice as practice to theory. The earlier doctrines
of the nature of nervous action are, however, so unlike those we
now hold that we can afford to pass over them lightly. They consist
of speculations on the topic of the seat of the soul, together with
explanations which suppose the passage either of a fluid or of some
chemical change down the nerves. Haller was the first to construct a
theory of the nervous system that has an appearance of modernity.

During the seventeenth century the favorite doctrine of nervous action
supposed the existence of a nervous fluid. This, it was held, passed
down the nerves to inflate or extend the muscle fibers. Inflation was
supposed to shorten the fibers and so the muscle came to contract. An
exquisite experiment by Swammerdam with his nerve-muscle preparation
had disproved this (p. 123). But Swammerdam’s work was unknown till
published by Boerhaave in 1736, and so the matter stood till Haller’s
time.

Haller concentrated the problem on an investigation of the fibers.
A muscle fiber, he pointed out, had in itself a tendency to shorten
with any stimulus, and afterward to expand again to its normal length.
This capacity for contraction Haller, following a predecessor, called
_irritability_. He recognized the existence of ‘irritability’ as an
element in the movement of the viscera, and notably of the heart, and
of the intestines. The feature of ‘irritability’ is that a very slight
stimulus produces a movement altogether out of proportion to itself,
and that it would continue to do this repeatedly so long as the fiber
remained alive.

But besides the force inherent in a muscle fiber Haller showed that
there was another force which comes to it from without, is carried
from the central nervous system by the nerves, and is the power by
which muscles are normally called into action. This force, like that
of irritability, is independent of the will, and like it can be called
into action after the death of the animal. Haller thus distinguished
the _inherent muscular force_ from the _nerve force_. Both these forces
he further distinguished from the natural tendency to contraction and
expansion, under changing conditions of humidity, pressure and so on,
of all tissues, living or dead.

Haller, having dealt with the question of movement, turned to that
of feeling. He was able to show that the tissues are not themselves
capable of sensation, but that the nerves are the sole channels or
instruments of this process. He showed how all the nerves are gathered
together into the brain, and he believed that they tended to its
central part. These views he supported by experiments and observations
involving injuries or stimulation to the nerves and different parts
of the brain. He ascribed special importance to the cortex, but the
central parts of the brain he regarded as the essential seat of the
living principle, the Soul.

Throughout his discussion Haller never falters in his display of the
rational spirit. He develops no mystical or obscure themes, and,
although his view of the nature of Soul may lack clarity, he separates
such conceptions sharply from those which he is able to deduce from
actual experience. He is essentially a modern physiological thinker,
and certain of his themes were developed by workers who come on the
frontiers of what we have called the ‘period of consolidation’.

Among these workers we would select the Scottish surgeon Sir Charles
Bell (1774-1842), who in 1811 showed that of the two roots from the
spinal cord by which all the nerves of the body arise one root conveys
only sensory elements while the other conveys only motor elements (Fig.
98, p. 208). By this discovery Bell not only completed the views of
Haller on the central nervous system, but also brought them within the
range of practical Medicine.


§ 4. _Some Physiological Advances._

Haller provided a philosophical basis to physiological conceptions.
There were, however, other workers of the time who added to the
knowledge of actual workings of the animal body. First among these,
both in time and eminence, stands the English country clergyman
Stephen Hales.

The Rev. Stephen Hales (1677-1761) was by temper a biologist, but he
had received a training in Mathematics and Physics. With this ideal
equipment, he proceeded to investigate the Dynamics of the Circulation.
His method consisted in applying the principle of the pressure gauge
or manometer to living things. By tying tubes into the arteries and
veins of animals, he was able to record and measure the blood-pressure.
He thus laid the foundation of an important mode of studying the
diagnosing disease. He extended his exact investigations into most of
the mechanical aspects of the circulation. He computed the circulation
rate and he estimated the actual velocity of the blood in veins,
arteries, and capillary vessels. He made a very important contribution
by showing that the capillary vessels are liable to constriction and
dilatation, a knowledge that has since become not only important for
physiological theory but of primary significance to the practising
physician (p. 309). He began to explore the wonderful mechanism of
the heart by which that organ adjusts itself to its needs of output.
He exhibited his versatility by important contributions to many other
departments, as, for instance, his discoveries on Respiration, his
improvements in Ventilation (Fig. 67), and his campaign for Temperance.
All his work is characterized by simplicity and directness, the supreme
marks of his genius.



In the meantime considerable progress was made in the knowledge of the
digestive processes. The French naturalist, René Antoine de Réaumur
(1683-1757), best remembered for his thermometer (1731) and for his
superb work on insects (1734-42), made a series of experiments on
gastric digestion in birds (1752). By an ingenious contrivance he
succeeded in obtaining gastric juice in a pure state. He was able to
demonstrate its power to dissolve food substances in a test-tube kept
at body temperature. This was important, since many believed that
the process of solution was the result of a churning process induced
mechanically by the muscles of the stomach-wall. Réaumur thus gave the
death-blow to the Iatrophysical conception of digestion (p. 130).

The investigation of gastric digestion was further pursued by a
versatile Italian, the Abbé Lazaro Spallanzani (1729-99), who showed
that the churning action is an aid, but not an essential, to the
process of digestion (1782). He proved that digestion was not of the
nature of putrefaction and differed essentially from the fermentation
of wine. Spallanzani thus improved on the view of Sylvius (p. 132),
and took a step towards that solution of the natures of putrefaction,
fermentation, and digestion which was finally provided by Pasteur (p.
225). He showed that the gastric juice was secreted by the stomach
itself, and not introduced into it from other organs. A suspicion
that the gastric juice contained a free acid crossed his mind. He
observed that it curdled milk and so began our knowledge of a separate
ferment, that of ‘rennet’. Spallanzani’s results may be summarized
by saying that he showed that gastric juice had a solvent power _sui
generis_, and that this power or faculty was of a different order from
putrefaction or vinous fermentation.

The phase of digestive physiology represented by Réaumur and
Spallanzani was brought to a close by the English physician William
Prout (1785-1850), who demonstrated in 1823 the existence of free
Hydrochloric Acid in the stomach. He showed that the presence of this
acid was necessary for gastric digestion, but that the actual process
of solution of food was the work of another agent. The matter was at
last brought into the range of medical practice by an American Army
Surgeon, William Beaumont (1785-1853), who, in the ten years ending
1833, had the opportunity to investigate gastric juice in a man who,
having been shot in the stomach, had a permanent fistula. Through this
the juice could be obtained and the lining membrane of the stomach
examined at will.



An important department of Physiology was opened by the extension
of the knowledge of electric phenomena to the living body. Static
electricity had been studied since the beginning of the seventeenth
century. Luigi Galvani (1737-98) of Bologna, while investigating the
susceptibility of nerves to irritation, showed that nervous action
could be induced by electrical phenomena (1791). He was, as a matter of
fact, producing an electrical current. Many thought at the time that a
new kind of ‘animal electricity’ had been produced and they dubbed it
‘galvanism’.

Alessandro Volta (1745-1827) of Pavia, deviser of the ‘Voltaic pile’
(Figs. 71-3), had long been working at electricity. He was able to
demonstrate (1800) that galvanism is without any essential animal
relationship, and showed that a muscle can be thrown into continuous
contraction by repeating electric stimulations.

Humbug and misunderstanding in connection with the electrical relations
of living tissues were rife, and it was not till after the period we
are now considering that electricity came to take a place in rational
Medicine. The change came with E. Du Bois-Reymond (1818-96), who took
the matter up scientifically about the middle of the nineteenth century
(1843 onwards). He showed that a nervous impulse is accompanied by the
passage along the nerve of a change of electrical potential. It should
be added that, despite all the work since done upon the nervous system,
this is still the only physical accompaniment of a nerve impulse that
has been detected.




§ 5. _Discovery of the Nature of the Air._

The seventeenth century saw advances in the knowledge of the air.
Boyle (1654, p. 124) had shown by means of his air-pump that air was
a material substance and could be weighed. By exhausting the air from
a vessel in which an animal had been placed, he showed that it was
this material substance and no ether, spirit, or other mysterious
entity which supported respiration. Mayow (1668, p. 126) proved that
a part only of the air was necessary for life, and later that this
same part was removed equally by respiration and combustion (Figs.
74-5). His work was forgotten for a hundred years. The great theorists,
Stahl, Boerhaave and Haller, knew him not, and Stahl’s doctrine of
_phlogiston_ set back the hands of the clock. No advance was made till
the work of Joseph Black (1728-99) which appeared soon after the middle
of the eighteenth century.



Black was a cautious investigator and his success was due to the
accuracy of his measurements. He was aware of the fact that chalk, when
heated, is transformed into quicklime (equation 1, p. 152), thereby
losing its power of effervescing with acids, but gaining the power of
absorbing water (equation 2). In modern nomenclature, the changes are:

  (1) CaCO_{3} = CaO + CO
  (2) CaO + HO = Ca(OH)_{2}

The first achievement of Black was to show that in the process of
heating the chalk lost weight (equation 1). This was a blow at the
phlogiston theory, for it had been supposed that quicklime consisted
of chalk _plus_ phlogiston, and that the phlogiston was conveyed to it
during the heating. Black now showed that if slaked lime be treated
with a mild alkali, such as the carbonate of sodium, it is changed back
to the state in which it was before heating, in fact into chalk, while
the mild alkali is converted into a caustic alkali. As we now express
it:

  (3) Ca(OH)_{2} + Na_{2}CO_{3}  = CaCO_{3} + 2NaOH

Black’s triumph consisted essentially in showing that reactions (1) and
(3) were indefinitely reversible and that the same amount of CaCO_{3}
could always be extracted from (3) as was put into (1). Moreover, he
showed that a definite amount of chalk, whether heated into quicklime
or not, neutralized an equal weight of acid, the only difference being
that the neutralization took place with effervescence and loss of
weight if the chalk were unheated, and without effervescence or loss of
weight if the chalk were first heated into quicklime. Thus:

  (4) _Unheated_ CaCO_{3} + 2HCl = CaCl_{2} + H_{2}O + CO_{2}
  (5) _Heated_ CaO + 2HCl = CaCl_{2} + H_{2}O

The substance given off by the chalk in (1), absorbed by it in (3),
and produced by the reaction (4), he named _fixed air_. We now call it
_Carbon dioxide_. The conversion of caustic lime into ordinary chalk
by exposure, CaO + CO_{2} = CaCO_{3}, proves that Carbon dioxide is a
normal constituent of the atmosphere. Black learned something of its
properties, and his work is also of very great importance as the first
detailed quantitative study of a chemical reaction and its reversal.
The properties of Carbon dioxide were further investigated (1766) by
Henry Cavendish (1731-1810).

The next advance in the chemistry of the air was made by the English
Unitarian Divine, Joseph Priestley (1733-1804). A series of important
observations was made by him in the seventies and eighties of the
eighteenth century. He showed that green growing plants would make
respired air again respirable, and that they gave off a respirable
gas. In 1774 he prepared Oxygen by heating certain oxides, though,
still hampered by the phlogiston theory, he failed to recognize the
nature of the oxygen he had produced. The conclusions of his striking
experiments on blood, which he showed to depend on this same agent for
its changes from venous to arterial, were similarly vitiated.



The real passage to the modern point of view in our knowledge of the
air was made by the brilliant French chemist Antoine Laurent Lavoisier
(1743-94). He made an extensive quantitative investigation of the
changes during breathing (Fig. 77), burning, and calcination. In the
course of these he discovered the true composition of respired air, and
showed how both Carbon dioxide and water are normal products of the act
of breathing. If clear grasp of the implication of discovery be made
the test, Lavoisier must be regarded as the discoverer of Oxygen.

Cavendish (1731-1810) had already discovered the composition of
water (1785). Lavoisier concluded that water and Carbon dioxide are
produced by the process of oxidation in the lungs, and that it is
this oxidization process, and not any innate quality of a mysterious
character in the body or in the blood, that is responsible for the
bodily heat. Lavoisier introduced much of the chemical nomenclature
that we still employ. So far as respiration is concerned, subsequent
research has added much to his standpoint. In the purely chemical
aspect, however, it has altered little, though we now know that the
tissues and not the lungs are the seat of oxidation.




§ 6. _Morbid Anatomy becomes a Science._

The main intellectual movement of the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries had been focused, so far as Medicine was concerned, on the
manner of working of the animal body, the department that we now term
Physiology. It was necessary to obtain clear concepts of the action of
the body in health before venturing into discussion of its action in
disease. Towards the end of the seventeenth century, an industrious
compiler had put together all the then published records of post-mortem
examinations up to his time. During the first part of the eighteenth
century many practitioners in Physic and in Surgery published
isolated cases or groups of cases connected with particular diseases.
Boerhaave regularly attended post-mortem examinations (p. 140). No
general pathological principles had, however, yet been elicited on a
scientific basis. The theories of disease such as those of Boerhaave
were perforce still mainly speculative, for there were no extensive
records of the correlation of symptoms during life with the appearances
of the organs of the body after death, the subject we now call ‘Morbid
Anatomy’. This gap was first effectively bridged by Morgagni.

Giovanni Battista Morgagni (1682-1771) was professor at Padua for no
less than fifty-six years. During this time he performed an enormous
number of post-mortem examinations, and made important contributions
to Descriptive Anatomy. In his seventy-ninth year, eleven years before
his death, there emerged from his enormous experience his work _On
the sites and causes of disease_. This classical treatise may still
be read with profit. Its leading feature is the very careful way in
which actual cases are recorded. The life-history of the patient, the
history of his disease, the events in connection with his final illness
and death, are all recounted with detail and care. The condition of
the organs at the post-mortem examination is minutely described and
an attempt is made to explain how the symptoms were the result of the
lesions. Morgagni is justly said to have introduced the ‘anatomical
concept’ into the practice of medicine. This concept is one of the main
elements in modern diagnosis, and a modern physician, in reflecting
on a case, considers first whether he is able to express the symptoms
in terms of lesion. There are many lesions of great importance and
frequent occurrence which Morgagni was the first to describe.

The task which Morgagni had undertaken was worthily continued by the
Scot, Matthew Baillie (1761-1823), nephew, pupil, and heir of William
Hunter (p. 165). Baillie was a successful London practitioner. He
followed a new and convenient method in arranging his work according to
organs instead of by symptoms, as Morgagni had done. Baillie performed
post-mortem examinations on several men of eminence, among them Dr.
Johnson, whose lung he describes (see Fig. 78).

The task of naked-eye pathological anatomy, effectively begun by
Morgagni, was effectively completed by Karl Rokitansky of Vienna
(1804-78). His work (1842-6) was based on an experience extending
over 30,000 post-mortems! Though disfigured by a bizarre theory,
it left but few gaps for subsequent workers. From now on, the
science of Pathology was to be prosecuted in a new spirit and with
new instruments. Even in his own day Rokitansky was something of an
anachronism, with his pure naked-eye anatomy hardly ever involving
experimental evidence on the one hand or the findings of the microscope
on the other.




§ 7. _Clinical Methods and Instruments._

The great teachers of the earlier eighteenth century, though better
equipped as regards knowledge than their predecessors, had hardly any
better means of diagnosis. Pulse-measurers and thermometers such as
those of Sanctorius and Galileo (p. 109) had proved impracticable by
the bedside. The microscope had not yet entered into Clinical Medicine.
Chemical analysis as applied to disease had proved, as yet, of little
value.

The first efficient instrument of precision to merit clinical
adoption was the ‘pulse watch’, by Sir John Floyer (1649-1734), an
English provincial physician. It was introduced as early as 1707 as a
‘Physician’s Pulse Watch’ and was an instrument constructed to go for
just one minute. At that time the making of a twenty-four hours watch
with a seconds-hand presented great mechanical difficulties. Floyer’s
invention was not widely adopted at the time. Attempts were also made
to introduce a thermometer into practice, but again the construction of
suitable instruments proved impossible.

Effective pulse watches and clinical thermometers did not penetrate
into the general practice of Medicine till well into the nineteenth
century. Two instrumental advances of first-class importance to
Medicine were, however, introduced during the later eighteenth century.
These were the methods of Percussion and Stethoscopy.

Percussion of the surface of the body yields notes of varying degrees
of resonance. Its application has proved of great value to the
physician in outlining the position of the organs and of lesions,
especially those of the chest. It was invented by Leopold Auenbrugger
(1722-1809), a Viennese physician who first introduced it in 1761. Like
the thermometer, it was very slow in entering the general practice of
Medicine.

Auenbrugger deserves great credit for his invention, but he did not
work out its application with anything like the completeness that
the Breton physician, René Théophile Hyacinthe Laënnec (1781-1826),
applied to his ‘stethoscope’ (1819). Laënnec’s instrument was of the
uni-tubular type that is now seldom seen. At first, indeed, he used a
mere roll of paper. His idea was rapidly diffused into every country.

But Laënnec did far more than introduce a useful and convenient device
into Medicine. He explored with extraordinary skill the physical signs
in the chest which correspond to a large number of diseases. The major
part of our chest-lore and much of the technique and nomenclature of
chest examination come direct from him. Despite continual bad health
and the shortness of his life, Laënnec’s brilliance and devotion to
duty at a hospital in Paris enabled him to transmit his views and
methods to many other physicians, both French and foreign. He is
unquestionably among the greatest physicians of all time. Clinical
medicine assumes with him a completely modern aspect. In reading his
work one feels that, had he been called in consultation by a medical
man of our own day, the two would have been able to understand each
other perfectly, after only a little adjustment and explanation.




§ 8. _Surgery and Obstetrics._

During the eighteenth century the improved knowledge of Normal and
Pathological Anatomy was a great aid to the surgeon. The technique of
Surgery was certainly improved. Operations were now being performed
with success that could not before have been attempted. Nevertheless
few important new principles were introduced until long after the
nineteenth century had dawned. It is indeed probable that as a means
of life-saving Surgery had an almost inappreciable effect on vital
statistics until the advent of Anaesthesia and Antiseptics. Even the
greatest surgeon of the eighteenth century, John Hunter, introduced no
fundamental new surgical principles. True, the names of many surgeons
of the period have become associated with operations invented or
introduced by them, but it was not till after the advent of antiseptic
methods that these were practised with full success. There are but two
surgical matters in which advances of great significance can be said to
have been made. These were the treatment of Venereal Disease and the
treatment of Labor.

Syphilis, which existed in Europe in the later Middle Ages, had
usually been confused with Leprosy and other conditions (p. 98). Its
treatment by Mercury had been practised at least as early as the
fifteenth century, perhaps as an inheritance from the Arabic-speaking
physicians. During the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries various
other remedies were tried (Fig. 33); much quackery arose around them.
In the eighteenth century the accumulated experience of generations
returned again to Mercury. Satisfactory methods of administration were
evolved and the treatment became standardized. It hardly changed until
the twentieth century.



The treatment and care of women in Labor made considerable progress
during the period of which we are treating. We have seen how there were
advances even during the sixteenth century (p. 93) by such a writer as
Paré. Works on obstetrics intended for women were often printed in the
sixteenth century in France, England and Germany. Scientific obstetric

works were produced especially in France in the second half of
the seventeenth century. The obstetric forceps was known, but was
still a family secret. At the time and for long after, there was a
great objection on the part of pregnant women to treatment by men.
The midwives were for the most part ignorant, dirty, unskilful and
superstitious, and the loss of life and health that resulted from
their mishandling was enormous. The objection to the ‘man midwife’ was
only gradually overcome, though his advent was unquestionably attended
by a fall in the mortality. About the middle of the eighteenth century,
moreover, the obstetric forceps came into wider use. One of the ablest
and most successful of the obstetric physicians was William Hunter
(1718-83), the brother of John Hunter.



Despite the absence of any great new principle in the surgery of the
period, there can be no doubt that a new spirit was introduced by
John Hunter (1728-93). His complex and interesting character demands
better treatment than it has yet received. As an investigator his
powers were superb, but, like Leonardo, he was handicapped at every
turn by literary incoherence. Nevertheless, with him Surgery begins
to appear, at last, as a real Science and not as a mere applied Art.
Hunter brought to bear on the subject a mind stored with ideas drawn
from Comparative Anatomy and Pathology. Quick to detect analogy, shrewd
in his scientific judgments, tireless and unsparing of himself in his
pursuit of truth, a victim of disease self-inflicted in the service of
science to which he was tragically a martyr in his death, he shows as
a heroic figure, rendered no less heroic by some very human failings.
Fully to appreciate so incoherent a writer, it is unfortunately
necessary to wade through many works written in his own clumsy and
ill-arranged manner. To gain any real idea of this great personality we
must consult the writings of his contemporary colleagues.

So far as actual advances are concerned, two may be connected with
Hunter’s name. Firstly, in the treatment of the deadly condition known
as ‘Aneurysm’ he introduced a method of operation which is still in
vogue. Secondly, he enormously improved the method of making and
ordering a museum. His monument is the Hunterian Museum in London,
based on his specimens of which many may still be seen there. The
museums of Natural History, as now constituted in all civilized
countries, have been influenced by, if they have not been derived from,
that which he literally gave his life’s blood to found. He was right
when he said musingly in his illness, ‘You will not easily find another
John Hunter.’




§ 9. _The Beginnings of the Science of Vital Statistics._

Attempts to combat widespread disease and to improve the public
health are to be found in the history of all civilizations, both
ancient and modern. Nevertheless, the rational method cannot come into
operation until it has exact data upon which to work. Such data may
be numerically expressed, a fact first appreciated by the versatile
English physician and inventor, Sir William Petty (1623-87), who is
usually regarded as the father of the science of Political Economy. In
1662, and on many subsequent occasions, he joined a friend in issuing
_Natural and Political Observations upon the Bills of Mortality_ of
London. In this work he endeavored to deduce population, death-rates,
disease prevalence, and other matters of vital statistics from the
crude figures of the day. He was fully aware of the imperfection of his
materials, and on this account he urged the necessity of providing a
system and a government department for the collection of trustworthy
statistics. In his _Political Arithmetick_ (1683), the basic work of
modern Economics, he displays ideas of a very modern character. Among
these is his view that the true wealth of a country is to be sought in
its efficient man power.

A number of Petty’s fellow members of the Royal Society began to take
interest in statistics. Chief among these was Edmund Halley, the
astronomer (1656-1742). Toward the end of the century (1693) Halley
produced a mass of statistics on the chances of life at various ages,
designed for the estimation of the price of annuities. During the
eighteenth century numerous writers devoted themselves to similar
investigations. An important contributor to the mathematical basis
of vital statistics was the French Huguenot and friend of Newton,
Abraham de Moivre (1667-1754). His _Doctrine of Chances_ (1715) and
his _Annuities upon Lives_ (1725) are important contributions to the
subject. His celebrated hypothesis that among a body of persons over
a certain age the successive annual decrease by death may be esteemed
as nearly equal (that ‘the decrements of life are in arithmetical
progression’) was under discussion for a century, but is now accepted.

In 1761 a Prussian clergyman, J. P. Süssmilch (1707-82), produced an
extraordinary theological work, _The Divine Ordinance manifested in the
Human Race through Birth, Death, and Propagation_. Its object was to
exhibit God’s design in the constancy of the numerical relationships
of vital statistics. Despite the motive--somewhat unpromising for a
scientific treatise--the work is of great historic and scientific
importance, for it was based upon a vast mass of statistics and showed
a great advance in method. It stressed the importance of accurate data
and the necessity for numerous observations, if reliable conclusions
were to be drawn. From the time of the publication of the work of
Süssmilch, the statistical study of population advanced rapidly. The
basis of statistics was greatly improved by the introduction of the
census system which was put into action in England in 1801.

The science of vital statistics was placed on a firm foundation by the
Belgian astronomer Lambert Quetelet (1796-1874). His principal work,
_On Man and on the Development of his Faculties, An Essay on Social
Physics_, contains an account of his statistical researches on the
development of the physical and intellectual qualities of man and on
the ‘average man’ both physically and intellectually considered. He
followed this in 1848 by his treatise, _On the Social System and the
Laws which govern it_. In it he shows how the numbers representing the
individual qualities of man may be grouped round the numbers referring
to the average man in a way corresponding to the principles of the
theory of probabilities. This conception, elaborated and further
analyzed, has formed the basis of all subsequent researches in vital
statistics.


§ 10. _Military, Naval, and Prison Medicine._

The eighteenth century saw some of Petty’s principles put into
practice. There was, as yet, but one section of public life in which
scientific principles of preventive medicine could be applied. Only
in the Army and Navy were the sufferers from disease under adequate
control and observation, and only there were proper statistics of
sickness and health available. Thus, many of the most important
movements in Preventive Medicine during the eighteenth century, both
in England and other countries, were initiated by naval and military
surgeons.

Among military medical reformers an important place is taken by a
Scottish pupil of Boerhaave, Sir John Pringle (1707-82). He had a large
military experience in the British army, occupied a position of great
influence, and was able to get many of his views and reforms generally
accepted. Pringle was among the first to see the importance of ordinary
putrefactive processes in the production of disease, and quite the
first to apply these principles in hospitals and camps. Important
conclusions on these matters were published in his _Experiments upon
Septic and Antiseptic Substances, with Remarks relating to their Use
in the Theory of Medicine_, which appeared in 1750. He identified
‘gaol fever’ or typhus with ‘hospital fever’. He laid down important
rules for the hygiene of camps which involved avoidance of marshes,
proper drainage, and adequate latrines. His most permanent service
was probably his suggestion that army hospitals should be regarded
as neutral, and be mutually protected by belligerents. This great
physician is a good illustration of the ‘new humanity’ which came into
public life in the eighteenth century. In much of that movement one may
feel the influence of that most humane of physicians, Hermann Boerhaave
(pp. 140-1).

Hardly less important than the work of Pringle for the Army was that
of his brother Scot, James Lind (1716-94), for the Navy. Lind was a
pupil’s pupil of Boerhaave. He had a long naval experience and in 1753
wrote an important work on Scurvy, then a very common and fatal disease
at sea. He demonstrated how this might be prevented by the adequate use
of fresh fruit or, when this was not available, of lemon juice. Fresh
water had always been a difficulty of sea voyages. Lind arranged for
sea-water to be distilled for the purpose. He introduced rules for the
prevention of typhus on ships, and made great improvements in naval
hygiene. His essay of 1757 _On the most effectual means of preserving
the Health of Seamen_ is a classic. He also wrote an important _Essay
on Diseases of Europeans in Hot Climates_, which opened the campaign
for the conquest of the tropics (p. 270).

Lind, like Pringle, is one of a type that is very fully represented
in the eighteenth century. A worthy representative of that school
was Captain James Cook (1728-79), the explorer, who adopted Lind’s
principles. He established a record in one of his voyages to the South
Seas. The voyage lasted three and a half years, and many hardships had
to be endured, but out of 118 men only one died, and he was consumptive
when he embarked from England. Of a different type was the Manchester
health reformer, Thomas Percival (1740-1804), who worked to introduce
the reforms of Pringle and Lind into civilian life. The work of
Percival leads on naturally to Southwood Smith and Chadwick (pp. 193-5).

The eighteenth century was essentially a period of individual effort.
The time was not yet ripe for public action on a large scale in
matters of Hygiene. Pringle, Lind, and Percival had, however, their
humanitarian parallels among prison reformers. Scientific attempts to
improve the ventilation and sanitation of prisons had been instituted
by the Rev. Stephen Hales (pp. 146-7). None brought greater devotion
to the task than John Howard (1726-90), a native of London who spent
his vigorous powers in investigating the prison system. His researches
extended to the hospital, quarantine and prison systems of France,
Flanders, Holland, Germany, Italy, Greece and Turkey (Fig. 88). His
reports were directly instrumental in the improvement of the hygiene
both of prisons and hospitals, as well as in the institution of
special fever hospitals in many countries. Some aspects of Howard’s
work were carried on by the great Quaker philanthropist Elizabeth Fry
(1780-1845), others came within the field of activity of Southwood
Smith and Chadwick (pp. 193-5).

The eighteenth-century humanitarian movement was active and had many
able representatives in the United States. Foremost among them was
Benjamin Franklin (1706-90), while in the ranks of Medicine none takes
a higher place than Benjamin Rush of Philadelphia (1745-1813). Rush
was particularly revolted by public punishments, to the abolition of
which he devoted much energy. In matters of Hygiene Rush was ahead of
his time. He wrote on the hygiene of troops and laid special stress
on fresh air and cleanliness of body and mind as an aid to health. He
had a peculiar horror and repulsion for alcoholic intemperance. He
was responsible for the first systematic work on insanity published
in America. He left a fine account of a Yellow Fever epidemic at
Philadelphia, and he approached the truth in his view that the disease
arose in Philadelphia itself and was not brought as an infection from
without.




§ 11. _The Industrial Revolution._

During the eighteenth century the character of English civilization
became modified by a factor which has since profoundly influenced all
civilized countries. There was a rapid increase in the number and size
of the towns. The main cause of this was the transformation of Industry
by the use of mechanical power. The change that resulted in the life
and outlook of the people was very profound. These changes and the
causes that gave rise to them are usually spoken of as the ‘Industrial
Revolution’. That revolution had effects that were both wider and
deeper than followed any other such single upheaval in history. With
the mechanical elements that were at the back of the Industrial
Revolution, such as the improvements in transport, the invention of
industrial machinery (Fig. 90), the enclosure of common land, the new
position of agriculture, we are not here directly concerned. What does
affect our story is the increasing urbanization of the population,
which began early in the eighteenth century, increased rapidly soon
after the middle of the eighteenth century, and has progressed
continuously ever since. In this matter England is but a type,
for all other civilized countries followed in her wake, though at a
somewhat later date.

Along with the growth of towns and the increased population there was
an increased demand for food. The country became better cultivated and
better drained, and there were many improvements in agriculture. Thus,
certain diseases began to diminish, notably Malaria, essentially a
disease of undrained and ill-cultivated lands. The expulsion of this
disease, as of Typhus, was the work of the nineteenth century (p. 283).

It is often assumed that the physical evils of life became accentuated
by the rise of the great towns. Nevertheless, investigation shows
that the opposite has been the case. During the eighteenth century
men and women began to crowd into the great towns from the country.
They were, in fact, right in their choice, for their chances of life
there were greater than upon the land. In the rural districts infamous
housing conditions, an overcrowding beyond anything which we now
encounter, exposure to weather, uncertainty and fluctuation in the
prices of commodities, low wages, unpassability of roads in winter
time, inaccessibility of medical aids, combined to render life, and
especially child life, more precarious than in urban areas.



The improvement of hygienic conditions in the towns began in England
soon after the middle of the eighteenth century. Westminster obtained
an Improvement Act in 1762, Birmingham in 1765, the City of London in
1766, Manchester in 1776, and most of the other provincial towns soon
followed. As a result of such Acts noisome streams which were but open
drains were covered in, the streets were paved and lighted, and the
sewers improved. There were still many glaring defects of sanitation
which have occupied and still occupy reformers, but by the end of the
eighteenth century the general appearance of a street in one of the
more advanced cities was much what it now is. The change from the
medieval conditions of a century before was at least as great as the
changes that have since taken place.





But if the streets had improved there was much under and around them
which would horrify us now. Water-supply, as in London, was usually
drawn mainly from surface wells and rivers. In most towns a continuous
water-supply was unknown. Even when water mains existed, the supply
to the houses was limited. Thus, even in the early nineteenth century
London houses had a water-supply only three times a week, and then only
for a few hours at a time. The water mains were often defective, and
there was not always that clear distinction between a water main and a
sewer that we now regard as desirable. Floods were a constant trouble
in all riverside towns. Cesspools were in use even in London as late as
the middle of the nineteenth century, and water-closets did not become
general, even in the better houses, until about 1828. The methods of
disposal of sewage hardly bear relation. In London the sewage simply
polluted the rivers.

The improvement of such conditions as these could only be made by State
action. The eighteenth century did well where individual activity
was concerned. It was reserved for Southwood Smith (p. 193) and
Chadwick (p. 194) to introduce into the sphere of practical political
action the truth, set forth by Bentham (pp. 190-2), that all factors
which influence the health of the country must be the concern of the
Legislature.

We gladly pass from this darker picture to the Hospital and Dispensary
Movement which took its rise about the middle of the eighteenth
century. Many of the great hospitals both in England and in Continental
countries were either founded or rebuilt about this time. Thus, the
London Hospital was rebuilt in 1752, St. Bartholomew’s in 1730-53.
Between 1700 and

1825 no less than 154 hospitals and dispensaries were founded in
the British Isles. Though defective from the modern point of view,
yet under the influence of the sanitary reformers, Hales (p. 146),
Pringle (p. 169), Lind (p. 170), and Percival (pp. 170-1), these were
incomparably better equipped, better ventilated and better found than
such institutions would have been at the beginning of the eighteenth
century. The notes of the industrious Howard (p. 171) give us a very
complete picture of them, and one that is more favorable than might,
perhaps, have been expected.

A defect of the hospitals of the time was certainly the nursing.
This, however, was somewhat better in the Lying-in-Hospitals, where
the services of a higher type of woman were available and where
ladies served on the committee of management. The general state of
the hospitals remained much the same until transformed by the changes
in surgery and nursing in the second half of the nineteenth century,
though a number of special fever hospitals and pest-houses were
established.

Something must be said of the more prevalent diseases of the Industrial
Revolution. Stress is often laid on the effect of urban conditions
on child life. Yet there can be little doubt that historically the
movement has been beneficial to it. This comes out well in the
death-rates. Thus, in England in the period around 1740, before the
industrial revolution had begun, about 75 per cent. of children born
died before the age of five. In the period around 1800, when the
industrial revolution had set in, the percentage of deaths had fallen
to about 41. In the period 1915-24 it was about 14. Among the most
characteristic diseases of children is Rickets. It is very difficult
to trace the early history of this disease, but its incidence seems
to have been very high about 1700, and to have fallen progressively
throughout the eighteenth century. This fall, it has been suggested,
was due to agricultural improvements which led to better supplies of
better-fed meat. It was these improvements and better supplies that, in
their turn, made the big towns possible.

We have already spoken of Scurvy on ships. It was, however, well known
on land, especially in winter when green vegetables were not to be
had. Lind (p. 170) in 1753 found it common in the land population. The
advances in agriculture removed it altogether from the land diseases
during the eighteenth century.





§ 12. _Control and Recognition of Epidemic Diseases._

Over one department of public health there was State supervision
during the eighteenth century. The ports were guarded against the
introduction of Epidemic Diseases, and especially against Plague.
Throughout the eighteenth and early nineteenth century there was Plague
in the Near East which extended at times to various parts of Europe.
It was epidemic in Russia in 1709 and some 150,000 died of it. In 1719
it spread to Eastern Central Europe. One historic outbreak was at
Marseilles and Toulon in 1720, when 90,000 died. The outbreak caused
great alarm in England, but did not reach this country, nor has there
since been any outbreak here. Quarantine is now regarded as antiquated,
vexatious, inhumane, expensive, and ineffectual. It seems probable,
however, that during the eighteenth century, when drastically enforced,
as in France with the Marseilles epidemic, it had indeed the effect
of keeping the disease within bounds. Incidentally, it led to the
foundation of many plague hospitals or Lazarettos, of the conduct of
some of which Howard (p. 171 and Fig. 88) speaks well.

During the eighteenth century Small-pox was never absent from this
country. From time to time the disease became epidemic, and there
were grave and fatal outbreaks. Thus, in 1774 there was an outbreak
of small-pox at Chester. Next year an investigation was made of the
degree to which the population had suffered. It was then found that
before the outbreak there were in Chester only 15 per cent. who had
not already had the disease. The incidence on those unprotected by a
previous attack was 53 per cent., with a death-rate of about 17 per
cent. of those actually infected and of about 9 per cent. of the entire
unprotected population.

With the certainty of contracting small-pox before their eyes, men
sought a way of getting it in a mild form. Outbreaks of small-pox
varied greatly in virulence, and infection with a mild form would
lead to protection from a graver one. In the East a method of direct
inoculation of the disease from a patient suffering from a slight
attack was widely in vogue from an early date. The practice attracted
little attention in Europe until Lady Mary Wortley Montagu (1689-1762)
studied it at Constantinople. It was then soon taken up in England, and
became recognized on the Continent.

The efforts of Lady Mary in England were reflected on the other side of
the Atlantic. The famous Puritan leaders, Increase Mather (1639-1723)
and Cotton Mather (1663-1728), turning from their exploits against
the witches, ardently urged the operation. In England the learned
Dr. Richard Mead (1673-1754), an eminent and far-seeing physician
who exercised very great influence on the medical world in his day,
published in 1747 a work in which he supported the practice of
inoculation with all the weight of his authority. During the subsequent
half-century the practice spread widely. The operation was largely in
the hands of specialists who were not always medical men.

Such was the state of affairs when the country practitioner Edward
Jenner (1749-1823) came upon the scene. In 1796 a dairymaid became
infected with a disease of the udders of cows, distantly resembling
small-pox. She developed pustules on her hand. Jenner inserted a
little of the matter from one of these into the arm of a boy of eight,
who developed typical cow-pox. Jenner next inoculated this boy with
small-pox, which, however, failed to develop. The evidence, so far as
it went, was complete. It is an entire justification of what might seem
nowadays to be a reckless experiment, that at that time inoculation
of small-pox was a normal and effective defensive procedure. The
disease of cows has since become known as Vaccinia, and the process of
inoculating it as _Vaccination_.



The discovery of vaccination, important though it be, is a mere
trifle compared to the train of new work and new thought that has
been opened out by it. The whole study of Immunity, which has now
become an independent science, arises from it. The work of Pasteur (p.
225), Lister (p. 239), and Koch (p. 234), and a large part of modern
therapy, are among the achievements of this movement.

Besides Plague and Small-pox, many other epidemic diseases became more
clearly understood during the period we are considering. Among these
was Scarlet Fever, the history of which is particularly interesting
for the variations which it has shown in virulence. It first became
clearly recognizable as a mild disease without prominent symptoms about
1650. Good observers in the half-century that followed considered it a
new disease. In England it continued to be of little importance till
about 1748, when it began to be associated with grave throat symptoms
and to be confused with Diphtheria. This phase continued for about ten
years. The virulence then dropped and the disease continued of slight
consequence till 1785. It then grew virulent again and remained so till
about 1808. The malignancy then fell again and remained low for about
thirty years. It rose about 1837 and from then till 1884 it was one of
the great killing diseases, especially of childhood. Since then, the
mortality from it has steadily decreased.

During most of its history Scarlet Fever has been liable to greater
or less confusion with Diphtheria. The clinical distinction was first
clearly made in 1826 by Pierre Bretonneau of Tours (1771-1862), who
gave Diphtheria its present name. The same French physician performed
the first successful tracheotomy in a case of Diphtheria. He is also
known for pioneer work in the recognition of Typhoid Fever.




VI

PERIOD OF SCIENTIFIC SUBDIVISION

(FROM ABOUT 1825 ONWARDS)


§ 1. _Origins and Implications of Scientific Specialization._

We have seen how the philosophy of Newton, with its implication, the
Reign of Law, which is the Uniformity of Nature, has come to pervade
scientific thought (p. 137). Now, before Newton as after him, there
were certain natural divisions of scientific activity corresponding,
in some degree, to the types and faculties of men. Since Science
first began there have been Mathematicians, Biologists, Physical
Experimenters, because in fact the particular powers which enable
a man to reach distinction in one of these departments are of less
value in the others. Until the period of which we are now to treat,
investigators were accustomed to explore at large within these great
departments. Such specialist professions as Actuarial Calculators,
Economic Entomologists, Physical Chemists, or, in the department
of Medicine, Medical Statisticians, Aural Surgeons, or Vaccine
Therapists--familiar to us now--were unknown and undreamt of then. This
subdivision is a new thing, and is a characteristic product of the
period of which we have now to treat. The subdivisions, unlike those
of old, are largely artificial. Thus, the Aural Surgeon who deals with
the organ of hearing cannot be separated clearly by his training, his
powers and faculties, his operative skill, nor even perhaps by his
field of work, from the Stomatologist who deals with the mouth, or
the Rhinologist who deals with the nose. Nevertheless these minute
subdivisions are convenient and beneficent in medical as in other
departments. The question of scientific specialization is so important
and characteristic that we must examine it a little farther.

It is often thought that, since no man can compass all knowledge,
this scientific subdivision is merely an attempt to compass a part
of that growing mass of knowledge which is becoming progressively
less compassable in its entirety. The movement, however, both in
origin and development, is less simple than this, for there never
was a time when a man could know all that was known about his world.
In this respect our own age is even as other ages. Were the view
philosophically tenable--which it is not--that Science becomes yearly
less comprehensible, our outlook would be gloomy indeed. For since
there is no evidence of any increase in the mental capacity of the
human race--at least in historic time--such a view would imply a
progressive diminution in the number of those competent to treat any
wide scientific area, and a corresponding progressive separation
from each other of minds with scientific insight. Fortunately such
conditions do not prevail; the view that they do is simply due to a
gross, yet widespread, misconception of the nature of Science.

Equally fallacious is the idea, which has become diffused by the
existence of scientific specialization itself, that the progress of any
science is to be measured by the mass of observations that its votaries
have succeeded in accumulating. This is far from being the case. The
advance of a science is measured by the degree with which it succeeds
in bringing a multiplicity of observations under general laws. Judged
by this standard, we should probably rate very highly, for example,
the present state of what is called _Demography_, the study of the
life conditions of communities, while we should rank much less highly,
for example, the present state of the study of Aural Surgery. Yet, for
one publication on Demography there must be many on Aural Surgery.
In the one case, however, the accumulation of knowledge follows a
well-directed and rational scheme. In the other it is prompted and
occasioned by the immediate needs of individual sufferers. This must
not be considered as derogatory to those whose task it is to treat
the sufferers. The point is that the one department, of its nature,
exhibits the rational spirit better than does the other.

Since Rational Medicine is the subject that we treat here, we shall
select for discussion those departments which best illustrate
its spirit. This does not imply, and is not meant to imply, any
belittlement of the less fortunate departments. On the contrary, the
less any scientific department has succeeded in eliciting general laws,
the more necessary it is that those most capable for the prosecution of
such advance should devote their attention to that department. It may,
indeed, reasonably be urged that a leading defect in our scientific
organization is that men of scientific insight crowd to just those
studies where their special powers have already been best exhibited.

In previous chapters, dealing with more remote times, we have been able
to place our facts in historic perspective. Despite the enormous mass
of scientific literature dating from the seventeenth, eighteenth, and
early nineteenth centuries, there is no real obstacle to selecting
what is most important in it. True, it is beyond the power of any
one student to examine all this literature at first hand, but it has
been arranged and indexed, posterity has passed its verdict, and the
historian can find his way through the thicket. It is also true that
important advances are sometimes forgotten, as happened to Mayow’s
discovery of Oxygen in the seventeenth century (pp. 126, 151), which
was repeated by Priestley a hundred years later (p. 154). But the
fact that we know of such neglected discoveries shows that, however
unjust the fates may have been to Mayow, yet his influence has not been
underestimated by later historians. The History of Science, therefore,
can up to a certain point be written along the same lines as political
or economic history.

The face of affairs changes, however, when we pass into a period which
differs for different topics, but may be roughly defined as beginning
somewhere between about 1820 and about 1870. We then begin to encounter
the very questions with which men of Science are occupied in our own
time. Since many of these questions still remain unsettled, it is
impossible for the historian to say with certainty which are the most
fruitful lines of work. The most he can hope to do is to distinguish
the most influential and stimulating thinkers and observers from those
who have been less so, and to say something about the ideas with which
the more important schools of thought were instinct.

When we look into the origin of the system of specialization, whether
in Medicine or in any other department of Science, we shall find
certain philosophical tendencies at work of which the modern man of
Science is the heir, though often the unconscious and sometimes the
ungrateful and even the misunderstanding heir. Neither men of Science
nor medical men are always philosophers, or at least not always
consciously so. Nevertheless, they are as surely influenced by the
streams of thought of their time as they are by their heredity and
their physical environment. The general tendencies of Medicine in this
or in any other age cannot be interpreted without some reference to
the intellectual atmosphere in which it has arisen and in which it has
flourished.

The intellectual atmosphere in which scientific specialism arose was
that of the so-called ‘Utilitarian Philosophy’. Many of the dicta
of that school, which came into prominence toward the end of the
eighteenth century, are still used as part of the language of men of
Science and others. ‘The greatest happiness of the greatest number’
is a formula launched upon our common speech by Joseph Priestley
(1733-1804, p. 154). The pursuit of such happiness as the main object
of human activity is taught by the ‘Utilitarian’ philosophy, a word
coined by the English political and social thinker, Jeremy Bentham
(1748-1832). To Bentham, the founder of that philosophy, we owe such
useful additions to our language as ‘codification’ and ‘international’,
and these, together with ‘utilitarian’, give us some clue to the
character and mode of his thought. It is probable that no thinker had a
larger share than Bentham in ushering in the era of the subdivision of
the sciences.

Bentham made a sustained attempt to draw a parallel between the
physical and the social sciences, and this gave him a special
influence over medical thinkers and especially over those that dealt
with the public health. His pupil, John Stuart Mill (1806-73), speaks
of his master’s mode of working as ‘the chemical method’. It is
thus not remarkable that Bentham should exert a profound influence
on Medicine, both directly and indirectly. The peculiarly logical,
uncompromising and perhaps un-English character of his mind, while it
prevented him, fortunately for himself, from taking an active share in
the task of government, did not prevent him from influencing those who
did. Specifically, he is the direct begetter of our modern system of
organization of the Science of Preventive Medicine.




§ 2. _The Revolution in Preventive Medicine._

Of all the many changes in Medicine and Medical thought that the
Period of Scientific Subdivision has witnessed, none have been
more revolutionary than those in the department which deals with
Preventive Medicine. Great and important reforms were introduced
during the course of the eighteenth century. These, however, even
when the result of legislation, were the outcome of the effort of
individuals, or were concerned with the Army and Navy (p. 169). In the
period that follows, the Public Health becomes a general political,
legislative, and administrative matter, and ‘Prevention’ becomes its
watchword. The public consciousness--moralists will call it the public
_conscience_--had been aroused, and has never again entirely slept. The
chief agent in the awakening process, the intellectual force at its
back, was and is Jeremy Bentham.

Rational Medicine has, in general, no national frontiers. To it men
of all the national units have made important contributions. But the
care of the Public Health in the period on which we now enter, being
an affair of legislation and administration, has developed along
national lines and it is difficult to discuss it save on a national
basis. It is a source of justifiable national pride that Britain has,
from the first and throughout, been the leader of the Public Health
movement. But while we lose little and gain much by telling the story
from the British point of view, it has still to be remembered that,
just as Rational Medicine has, fortunately, no spiritual frontiers,
so, unfortunately, sickness and suffering have no physical frontiers.
Epidemics pass the most scientifically constructed boundaries upon the
surface of the map, and without a passport. In our time this evident
proposition has obtained, at least, formal recognition. International
health legislation has at last appeared. A future historian of Rational
Medicine will be able to write his chapter on the Public Health
from the point of view of Humanity at large. The historian who has
the misfortune to be born too early must still content himself with
treating the subject along national lines.


(a) _Preventive Medicine in Britain._

If Bentham be the spiritual father of Public Health legislation, the
protagonists whose names must be associated with the development of the
movement along practical lines in England are Thomas Southwood Smith
(1788-1861) and Edwin Chadwick (1800-90).

Thomas Southwood Smith was a Unitarian minister, and long combined this
office with that of physician. Settling in London in 1820 he came under
the influence of Bentham. By his essay on _The Use of the Dead to the
Living_ he did something to remove the odium attached to dissection.
The scandals of the time and the common sense of the ‘utilitarians’
(p. 190) led to the passing of the Anatomy Act of 1832. Thus by a
proper legal process bodies became available for dissection by medical
students. Bentham died just before this Act became law and by his will
left his body to Southwood Smith to be the subject of dissection and
of an anatomical lecture.

Southwood Smith’s services to the spread of interest in Public Health
were very numerous. He circulated a simple and popular _Philosophy of
Health_ (1835). He served on a board of inquiry as to the condition
of children in factories (1832, cp. Fig. 191), and he was especially
useful to the Poor Law Commissioners by reason of his exceptional
knowledge of fevers. He was the founder of a ‘Health of Towns
Association’ (1840), and of another association for ‘improving the
Dwellings of the Industrial Classes’ (1842). In 1848 he became a member
of a new government department, the ‘General Board of Health’ (p. 195).
His official reports on Quarantine (1845), Cholera (1850), Yellow Fever
(1852), and on the results of sanitary improvement (1854), were of
world-wide use.

Edwin Chadwick (1800-90), who was not a medical man, introduced to
public notice what he called the ‘sanitary idea’, a conception that
colored the whole of his extraordinarily active life. He sat on
Government Commissions on Poor Law, on Police, and on the investigation
of the condition of factory children. One of his Reports (1833), issued
while he and the century were both in the early thirties, recommended a
system of inspection with a view to limiting children’s hours of work.
The current system of pensions and of trade instruction to soldiers and
sailors is the descendant of a scheme of Chadwick’s devising. An item
in the evidence attached to one of his Reports is the public provision
of open spaces for recreation, a topic of current interest at the
moment of writing.

At the time of the accession of Queen Victoria in 1837 Chadwick was
agitating for the appointment of a Sanitary Commission. Two years
later, as a result of a grave epidemical outbreak in London, the
Commission was appointed. Its reports, which drew wide attention at
the time, have had a large share in determining the general course of
health legislation in the ninety years that have since elapsed. The
scientific basis of health legislation can only be determined if proper
vital statistics be available. The Registration Act of 1838, under
a developed form of which we still live and die, was in essence his
work. If we search into the history of any department of the scientific
treatment of the Public Health, we shall always ultimately work back
either to Southwood Smith or to Chadwick and through them to Bentham.

Among the most important documents for which Chadwick was responsible
was the _Parliamentary General Report on the Sanitary Condition of the
Labouring Population of Great Britain_ (1842). It came to fruit in 1848
with the _Public Health Act_, which established a new governmental
department, the ‘General Board of Health’ (p. 196). The same year saw
the passage of the _Nuisances Removal and Diseases Prevention Act_,
by which summary action in such matters was rendered possible on the
complaint of specially authorized local authorities. Just as the Board
came into action there was an outbreak of Cholera in England, of which
54,000 persons died. The statistics available under the new system made
possible the deduction that the infection is conveyed by drinking-water
and led to suitable precautions. This is one of the many instances in
which the practice of prevention of a germ-borne disease preceded
any knowledge of its organic cause, or indeed any direct knowledge of
disease germs at all.

The first town in England to appoint a Medical Officer of Health was
Liverpool. The City of London followed in 1848, when Simon took office.
After Southwood Smith and Chadwick, Sir John Simon (1816-1904) was the
foremost figure in the history of the Public Health of this country. He
later became medical officer to the ‘General Board of Health’. The work
of this Board--together with its medical officer--was taken over, for
political and administrative reasons, by the Privy Council. The medical
department of the Privy Council became in 1871 part of the Local
Government Board, the medical functions of which were absorbed by the
new Ministry of Health in 1917.

To Simon are due the abolition of urban cesspits and improvement of
the system of sewers, and the institution of sanitary inspectors and
legislation concerning housing and overcrowding. One important result
of these measures was that it became possible to abandon the cruel and
wasteful system of quarantine that had been of value in the eighteenth
century. Simon’s plan, which was gradually adopted, was to trust to
the same preventive methods for foreign as for native infections. This
was, of course, only possible with an efficient sanitary service such
as he succeeded in instituting. Such measures were aided by laboratory
investigations, begun by a small staff. At first largely occupied
with examinations in connection with actual outbreaks, its scientific
functions rapidly grew. Working on a wider basis, these functions have
been performed for the nation since 1911 under the direction of the
Medical Research Council.




(b) _Preventive Medicine in the United States._

In the United States the history of the national Public Health Service
has been very different from that of the English system. The same
philosophical tendencies have been at the basis of the American as of
the English system. In the United States, however, the National Service
has been linked with the Army and Navy in a manner quite foreign to
British traditions. The Federal health system had its origin in the
old Marine Hospital Service, first authorized by Congress in 1798.
This enabled the President to appoint medical officers at ports and
elsewhere for the purpose of giving medical treatment to disabled
merchant seamen. The funds were obtained by a tax on those employed on
American vessels.

The first marine hospital under the Act was at Norfolk, Va., in 1800.
In 1802 a marine hospital was built for the port of Boston, and from
time to time hospitals were built at other important seaports. To
provide for the relief of seamen on inland waters Congress passed in
1837 an Act for the appointment of a board of advisory medical officers
of the Army. A number of hospitals were established on its advice.

The evolution of public health functions from this service was along
natural lines. The medical officers, in providing care for the
American merchant marine, were often the first physicians to diagnose
such diseases as Cholera, Yellow Fever, Small-pox and the like,
which were being imported into the United States. In the epidemics
of Cholera which occurred in certain ports of the United States the
marine hospitals and their medical officers were utilized for the
relief of those suffering from the disease. During the Civil War the
marine hospitals, together with the medical officers, were used by
the military authorities, both North and South, for the care of the
military forces.

Not until 1878 did Congress authorize any extensive use of the Marine
Hospital Service as a Federal Health Service. An Act of 1878 gave
broad powers to the Service to co-operate with State and local health
authorities in the control of disease, especially of Yellow Fever.
In 1890 Congress decided to utilize the Marine Hospital Service as
the Federal Health agency for the prevention of inter-State spread of
Cholera, Yellow Fever, Small-pox and Plague. In 1893 the powers of
the Marine Hospital Service in this regard were extended to cover all
infectious and contagious diseases, in co-operation with State and
local health agencies.

The efficiency of the Marine Hospital Corps in the control of epidemic
diseases became widely recognized. In 1889 Congress passed an Act which
made possible the further organization of the Marine Hospital Corps,
and provided that the officers be commissioned in grades similar to
those of the medical department of the United States Army. An Act
of 1875 had already provided that the Surgeon-General (supervising
surgeon) should be appointed by the President, with the consent of the
Senate.

In 1893 the Marine Hospital Service was organized into the Federal
Health Service. Congress continued to impose additional health
functions upon the Service, and in 1902 changed its name to the ‘Public
Health and Marine Hospital Service’ and made it a health service in
name as well as function. The larger part of its duties, up to this
time, had been the combating of epidemics, especially those of Yellow
Fever, which from time to time swept the country. With the threat of
Bubonic Plague in 1900 at San Francisco, the Marine Hospital Service
was placed in charge of control methods and succeeded in preventing any
extensive spread of the disease.

In addition to the quarantine and hospital functions, the activities
of the Service soon came to include research and educational work. In
1902 Congress authorized the establishment of the Hygienic Laboratory
for investigating Cholera, Yellow Fever, and other conditions.
The Laboratory grew rapidly and is now a very important research
institution, equipped for carrying on pathological, zoological,
pharmacological, bacteriological, chemical, and physiological work.

From the control of epidemics, the Public Health and Marine Hospital
Service began to develop control measures for the more common
contagious and infectious diseases, such as Typhoid Fever, Diphtheria,
and Scarlet Fever. The history of the wonderful control of Typhoid
Fever which has taken place in the United States within the past
twenty years is a part of the history of the Public Health Service in
co-operation with State and local health agencies. Typhoid fever, which
formerly took a toll of more than 50,000 lives annually, is responsible
for the death of a mere fraction of this number at the present day.

The development of health functions of the Public Health and Marine
Hospital Service continued until Congress in 1912 changed the name to
its present one, the ‘United States Public Health Service’, and at the
same time gave it broad powers to investigate the diseases of man and
the pollution of navigable streams and lakes.

During the courses of Federal development the separate States of the
Union were not devoid of protagonists of State intervention in matters
of public health. Among these was Lemuel Shattuck (1793-1859), who,
like Chadwick, was no medical man, but a student of social problems.
Under the influence of Chadwick he drafted in 1850 the _Report of
the Massachusetts Sanitary Commission_. This publication set forth a
complete scheme of Public Health organization. The formation of the
first State Board of Health in Massachusetts was, however, delayed
till 1869. In this matter Massachusetts was, in fact, anticipated by
Louisiana, which obtained a State Board of Health in 1855, and by New
York City, which obtained a Board of Health in 1866. Most of the States
followed in the seventies. The seventies and eighties were the decades
in which the general principles suggested by the work of Pasteur and
Koch were put into effect. The working hypothesis of sanitarians
of the time was that filth and ill-drainage were direct factors in
the production of epidemic disease. The view is now untenable, but
there was unquestionably an immense improvement in health conditions
resulting both directly and indirectly from the improved drainage,
water-supply, housing, and the like that the agitation had stimulated.

As the bacteriological discoveries of the time became generally
accepted, they were widely applied on American soil to the
administrative control of disease, notably by the New York Department
of Health under Hermann M. Biggs. That body, in 1892, instituted a
bacteriological laboratory, the scope of which has steadily increased.
Its work in connection with Diphtheria is elsewhere discussed (pp.
265-6).

To follow into our own time the development of factory legislation,
vital statistics, school medical service, local health authorities,
municipal laboratories and clinics, methods of food inspection, would
be to write a text-book of Public Health Administration. In all these
developments we see working the rational spirit in the peculiarly
English field of Preventive Medicine. The spirit of Rational Medicine
cannot function, however, without material upon which to work. The
basis, the elementary matter, as it were, of that material, is the
conception we form of the nature of the bodily processes. Such
a conception it is the function of Physiology to provide and to
Physiology we therefore now turn.




§ 3. _The Transition to a Physiological Synthesis._

Modern developments in physiological knowledge introduce an important
period in the History of Medicine, for the study of the functions of
the body is a natural portal of entry to the study of the perversions
and suspensions of those functions that we call disease. The general
character of physiological thought during the modern period may perhaps
be described as the ‘synthetic study of the animal body’. The study
has become synthetic because organs have not been studied so much in
and for themselves as in relation to other organs. There has been, in
fact, during the period, an increasing consciousness of the integration
of the organs into one organic whole, the entire process being under
the control of the nervous system, the various parts of which are
themselves integrated (p. 308). This movement has, to some extent,
mitigated the ever growing evils of scientific specialization.


(a) _Anatomy and Embryology in the Earlier Nineteenth Century._

Let us first glance at the state of anatomical knowledge in the early
and middle nineteenth century. The general structure of the animal body
was well known. Descriptive Anatomy was not far from where it now is.
Comparative Anatomy, which had made good progress, was given a fresh
impetus by the researches and by the authority of a brilliant group of
French investigators, headed by Baron Georges Cuvier (1769-1832), whose
influence spread to England, Germany, and America, where the leading
exponents were Richard Owen (1804-92), Karl Gegenbaur (1826-1903), and
E. D. Cope (1840-97). Cuvier was a biological dictator whose opinion
did much to encourage investigation, and something to discourage some
important investigators. His services to Comparative Anatomy can hardly
be overrated. There was, however, still no effective knowledge of the
anatomical differences between the races of man, while the species of
man and of allied forms, whose skeletons palaeontologists have since
described, were quite unknown.

As regards knowledge of the process of Development of the animal body,
the broad lines of Embryology were being put on a firm basis by Karl
Ernst von Baer (1792-1876), whose work was finished in 1837, though he
lived another forty years. The subject was to be given a new meaning by
the evolutionary school, which applied to new details and to particular
instances the work of Charles Darwin (1809-82). Foremost of this school
was Francis Maitland Balfour (1851-82).


(b) _Chemical Physiology in the Earlier Nineteenth Century._

The analysis of the functions and workings of the body had advanced far
less than the knowledge of its structure. The study of Respiration was
perhaps in the best position. The elementary conception of Respiration
attained by Lavoisier at the end of the eighteenth century (p. 155)
was hardly extended till E. F. W. Pflüger of Bonn (1829-1910), in
the sixties and seventies of the nineteenth century, showed that the
essential chemical changes of respiration do not occur in the blood or
in the lungs, but in the tissues.

A very important figure in the scientific world of the thirties and
forties of the nineteenth century was the German Justus von Liebig
(1803-73), professor of Chemistry at Giessen. He was a convinced
mechanist, and over the door of the University Laboratory which he
founded he had inscribed the dictum _God has ordered all His Creation
by Weight and Measure_. His great achievement was his application of
chemical knowledge to physiology. He did much to introduce laboratory
teaching, and certain apparatus which he invented is still in constant
use.

Liebig greatly improved the methods of organic analysis and notably he
introduced a method for determining the amount of urea in a solution.
This substance is found in human blood and urine, and was the first
organic compound to be ‘synthetized’, that is to say, built up from
inorganic materials. It is of very great physiological importance.
This is due to the fact that it is regularly formed in the body in the
process of breaking down the characteristic nitrogenous substances
known as proteins. Along with his colleague, Friedrich Wöhler
(1800-82), who had already synthetized urea, Liebig wrote a famous
paper (1832) in which he showed, for the first time, that a complex
organic group of atoms--or ‘radicle’ as it is called--is capable of
forming an unchanging constituent through a long series of compounds,
behaving throughout as though it were an element. This discovery is of
primary importance for our conceptions of the chemical changes in the
living body.

From 1838 onwards, Liebig devoted himself to attempting a chemical
elucidation of living processes. In the course of his investigations
he did pioneer work along many lines that have since become well
recognized. He taught the true doctrine, then little recognized, that
animal heat is the result of combustion, and is not ‘innate’ (compare
p. 156). He classified articles of food with reference to the functions
that he conceived they fulfilled in the animal economy. An outcome of
this was his food for infants and his extract of meat. Very important
was his teaching that plants derive the constituents of their food,
their carbon and nitrogen, from the carbon dioxide and ammonia in the
atmosphere, and that these compounds are returned by the plants to the
atmosphere in the process of putrefaction. This discovery made possible
a philosophical conception of a sort of ‘circulation’ in Nature. That
which is broken down is constantly built up, to be later broken down
again. Thus the wheel of Life goes on, the motor power being energy
from without, derived ultimately from the heat of the sun.

It was very unfortunate that Liebig conceived and adhered to a totally
wrong view of the nature of putrefaction and fermentation, which it
took Pasteur long years to displace.


(c) _Nervous Physiology in the Earlier Nineteenth Century._

From Chemical Physiology we turn to glance at the knowledge of the
Nervous System. Charles Bell and his contemporaries (p. 145) had
attained to a clear distinction of the nature of motor and sensory
nerves and their separate origin from the two spinal roots (Fig.
98). The next fundamental contribution was made by Marshall Hall
(1790-1857), who established the difference between volitional action
and unconscious reflex (1833).

The fundamental ideas in the conception of reflex action had already
been adumbrated by Descartes. In the view of that philosopher, any
stimulus is transmitted along nerve-fibers to the central nervous
system. There, on account of existing nervous connections, it gives
rise to a fresh impulse which passes along outgoing nerve-fibers
to the active organ, muscle, or gland, which is thereby excited to
activity (p. 128). Thus, every action of the organism, and its life
as a whole, conforms to definite laws. These laws must be directed
to its preservation, or organisms would cease to exist. It is thus
possible to look on organisms simply as elaborate mechanisms. Except
that we know that we ourselves think and feel, we might eliminate mind
from our consideration of the action of beings other than ourselves.
Such was the view taken by the mechanists and other members of the
iatro-physical school (pp. 127-131), which followed, to a greater or
less extent, the teaching of Descartes. The course of physiological
advance may be described, briefly, as the expulsion of the mental
element from process after process associated with vital activity. This
avenue leads on to a philosophical discussion whither we shall not now
follow. It will suffice, at the moment, to remind the reader that only
through the channel of _his own_ thinking and feeling is he able to
follow these physiological discussions at all.

The conceptions of Descartes and of his successors were greatly
extended by Marshall Hall. Interest was lent to Hall’s work by the
contemporary discovery by French observers of what was regarded as a
special center governing respiration--a very important reflex--in the
lower part of the brain. Hall’s work gave ‘reflex action’ a permanent
place in Physiology.





Since Hall’s time there has been a great extension of the conception of
reflexes. It has been shown that, besides the simple nervous arc (Fig.
99), there are more complex nervous arcs which depend for their action
on the integrity of an elaborate mechanism. The nervous system is
‘integrated’ under higher and higher centers, till at last the highest
centers of the brain are reached (pp. 308-11). Many of the ordinary
acts of life, sneezing, coughing, standing, walking, even breathing,
are expressible as reflexes. The attempt has also been made to press
the ‘instincts’ into the same category. But it is difficult to separate
the instinctive from the volitional elements or to define either. Vast,
therefore, as is the development of this department of physiology, it
is a very delicate task for the historian to pass any verdict upon it.
The ultimate value of all this work must depend upon the conception
that the next generation attaches to the mental element in vital
phenomena. There is evidence of reaction at the present time from the
extreme mechanist physiological position.

Lastly, in the discussion of work on the nervous system comes the
question of the localization of functions of the brain. The possibility
of such localization is a very ancient speculation. The idea was
developed along rational lines, in the first third of the nineteenth
century, by certain Viennese workers who, having made important
contributions to science, unfortunately afterwards degenerated into
phrenological quacks. Later several German observers began the study of
the electrical excitation of those parts of the cortex of the brain
which specially control movement (Fig. 100). The work was continued and
developed by a number of distinguished French and English observers,
among whom Paul Broca (1824-80), Hughlings Jackson (1834-1911),
and Sir David Ferrier (1843-) should be commemorated. Under their
influence many operations usually regarded as involving complex mental
processes, such as vision, speech, reading, writing, drawing, have been
represented as depending on simple nervous relationships. Centers for
the initiation of these operations have been described. Of late years,
there has been reaction from this mechanical conception of the brain as
an organ of the mind. The older school has, however, achieved clinical
success especially at the hands of the great French physician Jean
Marie Charcot (1825-93) and his pupils.




§ 4. _The Experimental Foundations of Modern Medicine._

We may turn back to consider those who have been the immediate
progenitors of modern Physiology. Among these, three men stand out
beyond all others. In order of seniority, and perhaps of genius, they
are Johannes Müller, Claude Bernard, and Karl Ludwig.


(a) _The Work of Johannes Müller._

Johannes Müller (1801-58) was the greatest physiologist Germany has
produced, and perhaps the greatest physiologist of all time. His
genius was of the universal type and, despite his early death, he
attained equal distinction in every department which he touched. Among
these were Comparative Anatomy, Embryology, Physiological Chemistry,
Psychology and Pathology. He was a careful scholar, well versed in the
history of the subjects which he taught, and as great a teacher as he
was an investigator. A very large number of the best-known men who have
advanced Medicine during the nineteenth century were his pupils while
he was a professor at Berlin. His lovable character was pervaded by a
mystical tendency.

Müller’s text-book of Physiology began to appear in 1834. It introduced
into the subject the comparative and psychological points of view,
which were not fully appreciated until the generation that followed.
The most remarkable generalization associated with his name--and
one further developed by Ewald Hering (1834-1918)--is the ‘Law of
Specific Energies’. According to this law each sensory nerve, however
stimulated, gives rise to its own specific sensation and to no other.
Conversely, the same stimulus applied to different organs of sense
produces a different sensation in each organ--that sensation, in fact,
that is its specific attribute. Thus electrical, mechanical, thermal
stimulation produce only the sensation of light when applied to the
optic nerve. On the other hand, any particular form of stimulation, for
example electrical, produces sensations of light, smell, hearing or
taste if applied to the appropriate nerves.

A moment’s reflection will enable the reader to realize the very
great philosophical importance of these conclusions. They provide
experimental evidence that the things of the external world are not
in themselves discernible by us. Such external things we know only by
the events to which they give rise acting on our senses, and yet from
one and the same event utterly different sensations arise within us.
To beings with senses different from ours the world also would be
different. The ‘Law of Specific Energies’ is thus fundamental for our
view as to the range of validity of Scientific Method.

Among other important contributions of Johannes Müller to the
physiology of the nervous system were his experimental confirmation
of Bell’s researches on the spinal roots (p. 145) and his experiments
on the production of the voice. He launched important theories in
explanation of color vision, of the mechanism of hearing, and of the
phenomena of fever. He was one of the first to use the microscope in
pathology and he was one of the founders of Physiological Chemistry.

Like every investigator Müller made mistakes. In 1840 he stated that
the velocity of a nervous impulse could never be measured. By 1852 his
gifted pupil, Hermann von Helmholtz (1821-94), had measured it. Much of
Helmholtz’s work hardly comes within our department. He was, however,
inventor of the instrument known as the _Ophthalmoscope_, by means of
which the interior of the eye can be examined. This is the main factor
which has enabled Ophthalmology to develop along true scientific lines
(p. 319).


(b) _The Work of Claude Bernard._

Claude Bernard (1813-78), the great French physiologist, was Müller’s
junior by twelve years and was in almost every respect a contrast to
him. His mind was of that peculiarly French type to which anything
mystical is abhorrent. He had few eminent pupils who owed much to
him directly, but the influence of his ideas, through his writings,
can hardly be exaggerated. Especially Bernard was the founder of
‘Experimental Medicine’, that is of the artificial production of
disease by chemical and physical means. This is one of the most
important scientific movements within our field.

Bernard’s great discovery, which occupied him for over ten years,
was that the liver has the power of building up and storing certain
highly complex substances, derived from the food and brought to it
by the blood. The substances thus stored, and notably that known as
_glycogen_, are distributed to the body according to its needs, in
simplified and modified form. Now Wöhler in 1828 had synthetized urea
(p. 206) and it was well recognized that this substance is a final
degradation product which the body manufactures by breaking down the
substances derived from food. It was also recognized that from this
breaking-down process the bodily energy is obtained. Bernard showed
that the body could build up complex chemical substances as well as
break them down. This destroyed the conception, then still dominant,
that the body could be regarded as a bundle of organs, each with its
appropriate and separate functions. Bernard thus introduced what we may
call a ‘Physiological Synthesis’, a conception of great import for the
development of medical ideas.

No less important, and bearing on the synthetic view of the working of
the animal body, was Bernard’s work on the physiology of digestion.
Up to the time of Bernard, an elementary knowledge of the facts of
digestion in the stomach constituted the whole of digestive physiology.
While Bernard was working on the glycogenic function of the liver,
another worker had suggested that the secretion of the organ known as
the ‘pancreas’, or sweetbread, emulsifies fats. Soon after, a German
researcher showed that pancreatic juice acts on starch. Bernard now
stepped in and cleared up the whole subject. He showed that digestion
in the stomach is, as he described it, ‘only a preparatory act’. He
proceeded to demonstrate that the pancreatic juice, passing into the
intestine, emulsifies the fatty food substances there and splits them
up into fatty acids and glycerin. He further demonstrated the power
of the pancreatic juice to convert starch into sugar, and he showed
that it has a solvent action on such ‘proteids’ or organic nitrogenous
substances as have not been dissolved in the stomach.

The third great achievement of Bernard was his exposition of how the
blood-supply to the different parts of the body is regulated. This we
now call the ‘Vaso-Motor Mechanism’. In 1840 the existence of muscle
fibers in the coats of the smaller arteries was discovered. Bernard
showed that the contraction and expansion of the ‘arterioles’ is
associated with a complex nervous apparatus. The reactions of this
apparatus depend upon a variety of circumstances in a variety of other
organs; again an illustration of the close and complex interdependence
of the various functions of the body upon each other.


(c) _The Work of Karl Ludwig._

Karl Ludwig (1816-95) held a series of professorships at Marburg,
Zürich, Vienna and Leipzig. He was, after Müller, the greatest of
German physiological teachers, and he surpassed even Müller in the
number of his pupils. As a physiologist he was chiefly remarkable for
his ingenuity as an inventor, for his wide and deep knowledge of the
physical sciences and for his extreme generosity in handing over his
work to his pupils.

Among the many lines of investigation of fundamental importance which
Ludwig initiated, some of the most remarkable depended on the discovery
of new methods. Just as the microscope had opened to the anatomist
unexplored fields of research by bringing him into closer relation with
objects which were hitherto beyond his scrutiny, so the rapid progress
of physics and chemistry had placed more exact modes of observation and
of measurement within reach of the physiologist. But the application
of these methods was attended with great difficulty; there was no
physiological laboratories, no instruments, no capable mechanicians
to whom the physiologist could apply for assistance. Under such
conditions, ingenuity and resource were indispensable to success, and
in these qualities Ludwig was pre-eminent.

Accordingly, we find that two of the most important of the early
investigations of Ludwig were as much due to his ingenuity as an
inventor as to his clear grasp of the physiological questions which
his inventions were intended to elucidate. The most interesting of
these inventions, or rather adaptations, is the mechanically rotating
drum or _kymograph_, as it is called. The word itself is derived from
two Greek words which mean ‘wave writer’. This instrument is now
widely used, not only in Physiology but in every department of Science
in which permanent records of any continuous movement are desired.
The most familiar instance is the self-recording barometer. The
kymograph--the use of which had been suggested by Thomas Young (p. 319,
and Fig. 101) in 1807--led to much wider applications of the method of
automatic record. Ludwig himself applied it to indicate the movements
of respiration, as well as the variations in arterial pressure.
Subsequently it became further adapted to the ‘graphic method’, and
it serves not only for the investigation of animal movements of every
conceivable kind, but even for the transient and delicate electrical
changes which are associated with vital action.

An instrument invented by Ludwig is the mercurial blood-pump, the
purpose of which is to separate from a known quantity of blood, derived
directly from the circulation, the mixture of gases which it yields to
a vacuum. This is an indispensable apparatus for the investigation of
the physiology of breathing.

Ludwig devoted much attention to the physiology of secretion. Here his
work has been of great importance in connection with the time-honored
discussion between the ‘vitalists’ and the ‘mechanists’. He succeeded
in showing that the process of secretion can be so transformed
experimentally as to do external mechanical work. This was victory
for the mechanist theory. The idea has since been applied to many
structures.

It is impossible to attempt here any general summary of the conclusions
reached by physiological research since Ludwig. Some have affected
the actual practice of Medicine. Others are too recent or too little
certain to have reacted in this manner. It is, however, safe to say
that the more important conclusions of the three modern founders of
the science, Müller, Bernard, and Ludwig, form the main scientific
background of the clinical practice of our time. The results of the
movement that they represent, together with the knowledge of the
cellular structure of the body (§ 5, p. 219) and of the life-histories
of the disease-causing organisms (§ 6, p. 224), are the three main
groups of ideas which separate the physician of our day from Laënnec
(p. 161).




§ 5. _The Cell Theory and Cellular Pathology._

During the process of the microscopic analysis of plants that took
place in the seventeenth century a number of observers distinguished
the walls of plant-cells and the word _cell_ was introduced into the
English language. Less clearly, a similar structure was discerned in
animals. No real understanding of the nature of cells was, however,
reached. Little farther progress was made in the eighteenth century,
but just at its close a young French microscopist, Marie François
Xavier Bichat (1771-1802), likened the microscopic structure of the
animal body to the substance of a woven fabric. The word he used was
the old French term _tissu_. He perceived that the different parts
of the body, bones, muscles, nerves, blood-vessels, and the like,
each presented a characteristic microscopic pattern. According to
these appearances he analyzed the parts of the body into twenty-one
‘tissues’. Study of this kind came to be called ‘Histology’ (Greek
_histos_ = web).

During the seventeenth, eighteenth, and early nineteenth centuries,
some advances were made in the knowledge of those organisms whose
bodies are made up of only one cell, but their essential nature was
still unappreciated. In the early nineteenth century a number of
botanists and others were observing cells and cell contents. But no
important advance in the interpretation of the appearances was made
until the matter was taken up by Schleiden.

Matthias Jakob Schleiden (1804-81), professor at Jena in 1838, put the
matter in a new light. He noted, as had certain of his predecessors,
the constant presence in every cell of the structure we now call the
‘nucleus’, and came to the conclusion that it is essential to the
life of every cell. He reached the conception, moreover, that in a
multi-cellular organism, such as a tree, every cell has a double life,
one an essential and independent one, pertaining to its own development
alone, the other an incidental and dependent one, in so far as it is
an integral part of the plant. His work was somewhat vitiated by a
fanciful conception of the origin of new cells.

The work of Schleiden was amplified and corrected in 1839 by Theodor
Schwann (1810-82), a pupil of Müller. He showed that the tissues of
animals, like those of plants, are susceptible of analysis into cells,
and the difficulty of this process arises from the extreme modification
of such cells as have developed for various special purposes. He showed
too that the ovum or egg of animals is, in the first instance, a single
cell, and that the cells of the body are derived and descended from it.
He demonstrated that the entire animal or plant body is composed either
of cells or of substances that are excreted or thrown off by cells.
He gained some insight into the life of animal cells and in doing so
he invented the very useful word _metabolic_. The word means ‘liable
to change’. It was used by Schwann, and is still habitually used in
modern Medicine to indicate chemical changes within the body which are
specially associated with living activity.

Contributions to the cell theory were made by other botanists. Hugo
von Mohl of Tübingen (1805-72) distinguished the contents of the
vegetable cell just under the cell-wall from the watery sap that fills
the interior, introducing for it the term _protoplasm_ (1846). The
Swiss, Karl v. Nägeli (1817-91), by chemical examination proved that
protoplasm is nitrogenous and differs from other cell constituents
(1862).

The cell theory was placed on a firm and clear footing by Max Schultze
(1825-74), successor of Helmholtz (p. 213) as professor of Anatomy at
Bonn. He defined the cell as ‘a lump of nucleated protoplasm’ (1861),
introduced the idea of protoplasm as ‘the physical basis of life’, and
showed that it presented essential similarities, physiological and
structural, whether in plants or animals, and whether in higher or
lower forms.

The study of tissues, Histology, was raised to the status of an
independent science by the Swiss, Albrecht von Kölliker (1817-1905),
pupil of Müller and professor at Würzburg, who wrote the first
text-book on the subject (1850-52). Apart from this achievement,
Kölliker is remarkable for having reached some of the conclusions in
connection with heredity that are associated with the name of Mendel,
of whose work he knew nothing.

Even more influential on medical thought than Kölliker was Rudolf
Virchow (1821-1902) of Berlin, one of the leading names in modern
Medicine. There is indeed hardly any department of medical thought that
has not gained something from Virchow’s work. His great achievement
is the way in which he carried the Cell Theory into the analysis of
diseased tissues. In his _Cellular Pathology_ (1858) he analyzes
diseased tissues from the point of view of cell formation and cell
structure. Important sections of the science of Cellular Pathology have
been explored so well by Virchow that they have been little extended
by his successors. He initiated the familiar idea that the body may
be regarded as ‘a cell State in which every cell is a citizen’.
Disease is often but a civil war. The white blood corpuscles, which
have the power of engulfing and rendering innocuous bacteria and other
foreign bodies, have been compared to police or scavengers. In some
respects Virchow was strangely conservative, and notably he opposed the
evolutionary view of the origin of living forms. Virchow’s conceptions
of the functions of the white blood corpuscles were largely extended
by the Russian biologist Élie Metschnikoff (1845-1916) and the English
worker Almroth Wright (1861-).

Since Virchow and Kölliker the study of the intimate structure and
workings of the cells themselves, as distinct from the tissues,
has become a separate and independent science under the name of
_Cytology_. It may even be extended to the study of cells in disease as
_Cyto-Pathology_.

Among the major developments of Cellular Pathology and Cyto-Pathology
is the study of abnormal ‘new growths’. The most malignant types of
these belong to the group known as the ‘Cancers’. The occurrence of
most of these becomes more frequent as life advances (Fig. 135). Their
cytological features are now well known. A cancer consists essentially
of an increase of cellular tissue, following abnormally rapid
multiplication of one type of cell. The new growth is equipped with
a blood-supply which enables it to increase at the expense of other
tissues and regardless of their needs.

Cancers almost always arise at one point, and are very seldom multiple
in origin. It is fairly established that they are not infectious or
contagious, and there is no very satisfactory evidence that a tendency
to them is inherited. Our scientific knowledge of Cancers is largely
derived from animals. Cancers are ‘specific’ in the sense that those of
one animal species will not grow when inoculated into another species.
An immense amount of work has been done on inoculated Cancers, but it
has become evident that some physiological factor is involved in Cancer
incidence such that an inoculated Cancer is not entirely comparable
with so-called ‘spontaneous’ Cancer. As to what that physiological
factor can be we are still in the dark.

Although we know nothing effective as to this physiological factor,
yet experiments in the artificial production of Cancer, apart from
inoculation, have been attended with success. That various forms of
chronic irritation are associated with the onset of Cancer has long
been clinically recognized. It has been found possible to reproduce
experimentally this relation between irritation and new growth, and
so, for example, to induce Tar Cancer in mice. Nevertheless, it must
be admitted that Cancer investigation is in an unsatisfactory state,
and has yielded fewer positive results than any other department of
Pathology of comparable importance. It is possible that we do not yet
know enough of normal Cell Physiology to investigate with profit the
forms of cellular perversion known as Cancer.




§ 6. _Establishment of the Doctrine of the Germ Origin of Disease._

The view that many diseases, especially those of a contagious or
infectious nature, originate from the invasion of the body by
special organisms and their multiplication within the body, came
into prominence in the second half of the nineteenth century. There
had been many previous adumbrations of this view and, in its final
establishment, more than one hand may be discerned. Above all others
who have worked in this field towers the mighty figure of Louis Pasteur
(1822-95). We shall do no grave injustice to any man if we treat the
scientific demonstration of the doctrine as the product of his superb
genius.

The opening of Pasteur’s interest in disease can be seen in his work
on fermentation. At first he was faced with the opposition of Liebig.
According to that eminent chemist, fermentation was not the result of
vital activity but was a purely chemical change (p. 207). A ferment
he regarded as an unstable organic product, the character of which
determined the manner of decomposition of the medium in which it is
placed. Pasteur demonstrated that, as there is a specific alcoholic
ferment, so there is a specific milk-souring ferment. Any nitrogenous
matter present in a fluid containing it will serve as food for the
development of a ferment, but will not of itself induce fermentation.
Ferments have, he demonstrated, the power of reproduction. Pasteur
rapidly seized on the idea of the specificity of ferments. An
albuminous sugar solution can be converted into various products by the
addition of various ferments. According as one sows, so will one reap.
The milk-souring ferment, Pasteur concluded, is organized and living,
and its action is correlated to its development and organization. No
life, no ferment; no ferment, no fermentation.



During the next years Pasteur applied himself to a study of ferments
and notably of those which involve deterioration of wines and beers.
This led him to perceive that there is a great multiplicity and
variety of these organisms. Now it was an old and well-known view
that fermentation, putrefaction, and the infection of disease had much
in common. It was perfectly natural, therefore, for Pasteur to regard
the latter in the light of a vital process. A great difficulty was,
however, the demand that any such doctrine made on the germ-bearing
capacity of the air. Cities were not slow to avail themselves of this
weakness, and pointed out that, according to Pasteur, the air must
be one solid mass of germs! For the opponents of Pasteur the living
organisms found in the process of fermentation or decomposition were
the result, not the cause, of the process. These organisms were
regarded by them as spontaneously generated in the fermentation
process. Thus arose a discussion of the old theme of spontaneous
generation.

By 1859--the year of publication of Darwin’s _Origin of
Species_--Pasteur was engaged in controversy as to the ‘Origin of
Life’. The discussion specially turned round what were then regarded as
the lowest forms of life, the Bacteria. Were they ever spontaneously
generated, or were they not? If a flask of broth, supposedly sterilized
by boiling, went ‘bad’ and organisms appeared in it, was it certain
that they had come from without, or could they have been spontaneously
generated by the broth itself? Life must begin somewhere. Then why
not here at this lowest stage? If this view be justifiable, Pasteur’s
doctrine of the nature of ferments must fall to the ground.

Pasteur had thus before him the task of proving a universal negative--a
task impossible in Formal Logic. But Science is not Formal Logic. In
the end he clinched the matter by an exquisitely simple experiment
which must, at once, carry conviction. A flask with a long S-shaped
neck is filled with a putrescible fluid. It is heated to boiling, to
kill all organisms, and then left in the still air of a room. Air can
enter, but any floating germs that enter naturally fall on the floor
of the S-shaped neck of the flask. Months may go by without any change
in the liquid, but once the neck is severed, so that organisms can
enter freely from the air, fermentation sets in within a few hours, and
organisms can be detected in the liquid. Only living organisms from the
air can have caused the change.



The first disease which Pasteur was able to demonstrate as causatively
related to a living organism was a condition that was devastating the
silk-worm industry of France. In 1866 he proved the contagiousness of
the disease, showed that it was due to a living organism, and followed
the organism through the life-history of moth, egg, worm, and chrysalis.

In 1870 the Franco-Prussian war broke out. Pasteur now decided to make
investigations into the diseases of beer, his object being to improve
the French brews and to carry the war into the enemy’s camp by making
them equal to the German! He succeeded in isolating special organisms,
mostly yeasts, which produced defects in beer (Fig. 106). This work
naturally led to an enlargement of his views on the nature and action
of micro-organisms.

About this time Pasteur was elected a member of the French Academy
of Medicine, a very unusual honor for one not a medical man. Lister
had already begun his teaching, based partly on the work of Pasteur,
and indeed his first important paper on antiseptic surgery had been
published in the very year of the Franco-Prussian war. On entering the
Academy Pasteur found himself faced by all kinds of ancient prejudices
and misconceptions in connection with his new doctrine, and especially
with his denial of spontaneous generation. Among his supporters was the
physiologist, Claude Bernard (p. 213). His work proceeded to more and
more triumphant issues.

The first disease that affects man on which Pasteur was able to throw
light was Anthrax, in relation to which his work interdigitates with
that of Robert Koch and some other observers. Anthrax is a deadly
and highly contagious condition which commonly affects cattle, but
sometimes spreads to man. As early as 1855, a German observer had
noted microscopic rod-like objects in the blood of beasts dead of
the disease. In 1868 an older French contemporary of Pasteur had
shown that a bacillus is not simply the inseparable companion of the
disease, but also is its cause and its only constantly acting cause. At
this time the losses of cattle from Anthrax in France were enormous.
The character of the outbreaks had been studied and seemed wholly
unexplained by what was known of the bacillus. Farmers found that they
lost cattle in fields from which infected animals had been excluded for
months or even years. How was it to be explained?

The explanation was, in fact, advanced in 1876 by the German observer,
Robert Koch of Berlin (1843-1910), whose work was now beginning.
He showed that the anthrax bacilli under certain conditions formed
‘spores’, that is to say small encysted bodies, exceedingly resistant
to heat and to other changes of external conditions (Fig. 108). This
discovery opened up a new field which was cultivated by Koch and
Pasteur and their followers.



While making his studies on ferments in 1863, Pasteur had witnessed the
formation of spores in the organisms of butyric fermentation, but had
failed to grasp their significance. In 1869 he had again found spores
forming in the organisms of silk-worm disease, and had shown that they
resisted prolonged drying. On the basis of their resistance he had
explained the persistence and latency of the silk-worm disease. Other
observers had had similar experiences. The investigations of none of
them, however, approached in brilliance and completeness those of Koch.

Koch found that spores always form in the blood and tissues of animals
dead of Anthrax, provided that

(1) the temperature is suitable, and (2) there is sufficient
oxygen. These two conditions, temperature and oxygen, were found to
be necessary. Below 18° Centigrade spores are not formed; at 30°
Centigrade they occur at the end of thirty hours; at 35° Centigrade
in twenty hours. The rapidity with which spores are formed is,
therefore, proportional to the amount of heat. Oxygen was also found
to be indispensable. Anthrax blood, if deprived of oxygen, ceases to
be virulent in twenty-four hours without putrefaction. When the blood
is allowed to putrefy the virulence also disappears if putrefaction
exhausts the oxygen quickly enough to prevent the spores having time to
form. If the spores have already formed, putrefaction does not kill
them, nor does it prevent them from developing later if circumstances
become favorable. The persistence of the disease and its return in
an infected country was thus explained. It was the spore which was
the agent of preservation, which persisted where the conditions of
temperature and of aeration had permitted it to form, and which always
held itself in readiness to make new victims.

The matter was carried further by Pasteur in 1877. At that time he
did not know of all the work of Koch. He succeeded in obtaining pure
cultures of Anthrax. The question was then still being debated in
France as to whether Anthrax was caused by a ‘virus’, that is to say a
non-living poison, or by a microbe. Pasteur had long been a believer in
the microbic theory, and it seemed to him probable that the blood of an
animal infected with Anthrax, if sown in a suitable medium, would stock
it solely with anthrax bacilli which he could then keep pure for an
indefinite time in successive cultures, as he had done with yeast and
other ferments.

Experiment proved this to be the case, and showed that the anthrax
organism multiplied abundantly in urine made neutral or slightly
alkaline. From that time the problem was solved. Take a series of
cultures of the organism, transferring each time one drop from the
preceding culture into 50 c.c. of fresh urine. The first dilution
is 1/1000, the second one in a million, the third one in a thousand
million. After ten cultures it falls to such a figure that the
original drop of blood has been drowned in an ocean. Everything that
it carried with it, to which we might attribute the production of
Anthrax--red corpuscles, white corpuscles, granules of all sorts--is
either destroyed by the change of medium or is widely disseminated in
this ocean and is lost. Only the organism can escape the dilution. Why?
Because it has multiplied in each of the cultures. A drop from the last
culture killed a rabbit or guinea-pig as surely as a drop of anthrax
blood. It was, therefore, to the organism that the virulence belonged.
A conclusion of the first rank was firmly established.

With a ‘pure culture’ of Anthrax in his possession Pasteur was able
to experiment in a way which none had previously attempted. The most
interesting stage of his work was now entered upon. He perceived that
there are some species of animals which are refractory to Anthrax.
Such are the birds. Nevertheless, the blood of a bird, when drawn
from the animal, is an excellent culture medium for the bacterium.
Why does it resist infection in the animal? Pasteur showed that the
anthrax organism will not live in the bird because the living-blood
in full circulation is filled with an infinite number of corpuscles
which, in order to live and perform their physiological function, need
free oxygen. When, therefore, the anthrax organism enters normal blood
of living birds, it meets competitors ready to seize the oxygen for
their own use. But the blood of other animals besides birds contains
corpuscles eager for oxygen. Why can anthrax grow in them and not
in birds? This question Pasteur answered by a convincing series of
experiments (1878). The normal temperature of birds is higher than that
of mammals and is, moreover, higher than that at which the growth of
the anthrax organism is most vigorous. Thus the blood corpuscles of
the bird have the anthrax bacteria at a disadvantage. But if, by a cold
bath, the temperature of a bird be lowered to that of a mammal, and if
anthrax organisms be injected into the blood-stream, they will grow and
flourish at the expense of the bird.

The experiments with Anthrax on fowls led to experiments on the same
creatures with another disease, the virulence of which was known
to vary, Chicken Cholera. Thus arose naturally Pasteur’s ideas and
observations in the department of Immunity (p. 261).

If Pasteur can be said to have laid the foundations of the knowledge
of the nature of infection, it is to Koch that we owe the main basis
of the technique by which diseases are now studied. He it was who
elevated Bacteriology into the position of a separate science. Soon
after his work on Anthrax he published a remarkable research which
placed our knowledge of wound infection on a firm footing. He is thus
among those who helped to create modern surgical technique. Many other
communications came from him. None was of more far-reaching importance
than his demonstration of the organism of Tuberculosis in 1882. All
subsequent work in connection with Consumption and allied conditions
has been rendered possible only by this discovery of Koch. Other
investigations associated with his name are on Cholera and on Sleeping
Sickness. Koch was unquestionably the greatest bacteriologist that the
world has seen. His genius was limited as compared to that of Pasteur,
but his exquisite technical skill and acumen have never been excelled.

Since the time of Pasteur and Koch, the study of infectious disease
has developed along various special lines. The work of these two
men, however, has determined the direction of those lines, and
they themselves are the most typical, as well as the greatest,
representatives of the most important of all movements in modern
Medicine.


§ 7. _Anaesthesia._

The aspect of surgical practice was dramatically changed during
the course of the nineteenth century by two discoveries, that of
Anaesthesia and that of the Antiseptic method. It will be convenient to
consider Anaesthesia first.

There were from the earliest times many devices for producing more
or less complete unconsciousness during surgical operations. An idea
of the extremes to which surgeons at the beginning of the nineteenth
century were put in this matter can be gathered from a glance at some
of their devices (Fig. 108a).

The new era began in 1846 when the dentist, William Thomas Green Morton
(1819-68), demonstrated at the Massachusetts General Hospital the
simplicity and safety of Ether anaesthesia. The idea immediately caught
on. Before the year was out Ether was being used for surgical purposes
in England. In January, 1847, Sir James Young Simpson (1811-70) was
using it in Edinburgh for obstetric purposes. A few months later he
adopted Chloroform, which had been prepared by Liebig in 1832.

The use of the drugs spread very rapidly and almost as rapidly changed
the character of surgical technique. Until the adoption of anaesthesia,
speed was of primary importance in surgical procedure. Excessive speed
now became a matter of less importance, and operative neatness and
completeness took its place as the chief quality of good surgery.
Moreover, operations of a more drastic character could be undertaken
since the shock to the patient was minimized. Women in labor were found
to bear Chloroform peculiarly well and safely, and its use in midwifery
steadily spread despite some foolish and fanatical opposition.

Soon after the introduction of anaesthetics efforts were made by
various methods to secure a painless state of a part without involving
unconsciousness. The first successes were obtained in 1884 at Vienna
with applications of solutions of the alkaloid (p. 325) Cocaine,
first to the eye, then to the nose and other parts. Cocaine, or some
derivative of it, has ever since been much used in Medicine. It was
soon being given by injection under the skin for small superficial
operations. Next, good results from injecting solutions of it into the
nerves were obtained by several American surgeons, earliest of whom
was W. S. Halsted (1852-). His work of 1885 was extended in 1898 by
Harvey Cushing (1869-). Yet another American surgeon, J. L. Corning
(1855-), introduced the method of so-called ‘spinal anaesthesia’.
This is secured by injecting a solution of Cocaine or one of its
derivatives into the spinal canal and thereby inducing insensibility to
pain (‘analgesia’) below the site of injection. In 1908 the American G.
W. Crile (1864-) introduced a valuable method of combining local and
general anaesthesia, whereby he minimized the effects of ‘shock’ (pp.
310-11) during the progress of the operation.

From first to last almost all the pioneer work upon anaesthetics and
analgesics has been of American origin. Even the word _anaesthesia_
is an American invention. It was introduced or at least familiarized
by Oliver Wendell Holmes (1809-94), the distinguished and brilliant
author of the ‘Breakfast Table’ series. Laughing Gas was first applied
to dental purposes a short time before Ether was given its surgical
application, and its introduction for this purpose was the work of the
American dentist Horace Wells (1815-45), of Hartford, Connecticut.




§ 8. _The Revolution in Surgery._

This history of antiseptic surgery is inseparably linked with the name
of Lord Lister (1827-1912), whose work naturally dovetails into that of
Pasteur. Lister’s attention was first called to the work of Pasteur in
1865. But Pasteur’s views on the life of micro-organisms came to a mind
that had been prepared for them. Lister had had, moreover, a long and
varied surgical experience and had been present at the first operation
performed in England under Ether anaesthesia in 1846.

At that time and for long after, Surgery was cursed by the constant
fear of sepsis. A vast amount of death and suffering was due to this
cause, and surgeons were reluctant to perform many operations that
we should now regard as trivial. Lister’s first attempt to make any
scientific analysis of the septic state is to be found in a paper by
him on _The Early Stages of Inflammation_ (1853). He showed that the
effects of irritation on the tissues are twofold. Firstly, there is
a dilatation of the arteries which is developed through the nervous
system. Secondly, there is an alteration in the tissues on which the
irritant acts directly. This alteration imparted, as Lister thought,
an adhesiveness to both the red and the white corpuscles, making them
prone to stick to one another and to the walls of the vessels, and so
giving rise to stagnation of blood and ultimately to obstruction.

Some years before (1847) A. V. Waller (1816-1870), a pupil of Magendie,
had shown that during the process of inflammation there is an active
migration of white blood corpuscles through the walls of the capillary
blood-vessels. Waller’s observations attracted but little attention at
the time. They were, however, amply confirmed in 1878 and the following
years by the German pathologist Julius Cohnheim (1839-84), a pupil of
Virchow. Cohnheim showed that this process of migration of white blood
corpuscles is the essence of inflammation and that when inflammation
goes on to suppuration the pus that is formed consists largely of white
blood corpuscles in a dead and disintegrating state.

Irritation, and the reaction of the body against it, ‘inflammation’,
are encountered in all injuries in which the healing is not direct
and healthy. It was those cases of injury in which the healing was
indirect and unhealthy which then formed the surgeon’s chief problem.
Of these there are a variety, now rare, then very common and fatal,
as Blood-Poisoning, Erysipelas, Pyaemia, Septicaemia, Hospital
Gangrene, and that form, then so common as to be almost normal, simple
suppuration of a wound.

About 1861 Lister began to teach publicly that the occurrence of
suppuration in a wound is determined ‘simply by the influence of
decomposition’. The nature of decomposition was revealed to him by the
writings of Pasteur. From him he learned that putrefaction was, in
fact, a fermentation, and that it was caused by the growth of minute
microscopic organisms borne by the air. It was generally supposed that
air was the cause of sepsis, and precautions were taken to exclude it
from wounds. But Lister now saw that not air but that which it carried
was the mischief-maker.

The general course of action was now clear to him. As a laboratory
proposition the destruction of the organisms of the air was simple. The
problem was to exclude them from wounds during and after operation. The
solution of that problem developed as ‘Antiseptic Surgery’, which later
became ‘Aseptic Surgery’. At first he paid most attention to air, as
the source of infection. He recognized, however, that he must also deal
with the germs present in the wound and on his hands. Of the methods
available for ridding the air of its germs, viz. heat, filtration, and
chemical action, he chose the last.

At that time carbolic acid was in use as a means of treating sewage. At
first, therefore, Lister tried lint soaked in crude carbolic. This he
found liable to cause superficial sloughing and death of the tissues.
He next obtained a purer acid, using a solution in oil. A putty formed
of common whitening and a solution of carbolic acid in linseed oil was
used as a dressing. He adopted later a system of spraying the part
during operation (Fig. 109).



When Lister began his work, amputation of a limb was a very fatal
operation. Yet it had to be performed in most cases of severe fracture
in which the bone was exposed because, without it, death from sepsis
was almost certain. The improvement in Lister’s own records of
amputation, incident upon his adoption of the antiseptic method, is
well brought out by his own figures:

  _Years._   _Cases._ _Recovered._   _Died._       _Mortality._
  1864-66      35          19          16     43% without antiseptics
  1867-70      40          34           6      15% with antiseptics

These results were considered extraordinarily good in their day. It
is an index of the further advance since Lister’s first attempts that
results ten times as good would now be regarded as unsatisfactory.
Moreover not only has the further development of Lister’s method
rendered amputation safer, but also it has enabled the surgeon to treat
many cases without amputation, when before he would have been compelled
to resort to that measure.

Lister first recorded his observations on the antiseptic system of
surgery in 1867. Apart from the technical advances that he then set
forth, he recorded also many new pathological facts that have since
proved of great practical importance. Thus he showed that an uninfected
clot, if undisturbed, can become organized into a living tissue, and
that a piece of dead bone may be absorbed in an aseptic wound. These
are now matters of common knowledge, but then they were instrumental
in introducing a radically new outlook.

Lister gradually perfected his technique, chiefly in the direction of
using milder antiseptics and adopting heat for the sterilization of
instruments and dressings. The antiseptic system was given its military
application in France during the war of 1870. It was soon taken up also
by German surgeons. The history of surgery since Lister’s day has been
very often told. An important element in it is the gradual supersession
of ‘antiseptic’ by ‘aseptic’ methods (p. 248).

The Listerian system, in rendering surgery safer, had also the
effect of opening up many fields of operation that had previously
been regarded as impracticable. Especially is this the case with
abdominal surgery, which effectively dates from the introduction of
the antiseptic system. Lister was often misunderstood and some of his
contemporaries, and some even of those who opposed him, were really
practising his system without knowing it.

Among the most important reactions of antiseptic surgery was that upon
the conduct of labor. Here Lister had a predecessor, as he gladly and
generously acknowledged. This was the unfortunate and almost insane
Viennese genius, Ignaz Semmelweis (1818-65). At the great lying-in
hospital at Vienna in which he was an assistant the death-rate at one
time rose to thirty per cent., the so-called ‘puerperal fever’ being
the active cause. The women were attended by students or physicians
who were visiting the post-mortem room. Semmelweis showed that the
infective material that conveyed the fever was brought by the hands of
the operator from the dead bodies and he showed that puerperal fever
was caused by decomposed animal matter. By insisting on the hands
of the operators being sterilized, Semmelweis succeeded in 1846 in
enormously reducing the mortality. After the acceptance of Lister’s
antiseptic system the methods of Semmelweis were universally introduced
into the practice of Midwifery. Another predecessor of Lister was
Oliver Wendell Holmes. As early as 1843 he pointed out that the
mysterious ‘puerperal fever’ was contagious, and carried by the hands
of the operator. He suggested precautions not dissimilar to those of
Semmelweis.




§ 9. _Some Modern Surgical Advances._

Among the most capable surgeons of Lister’s own day was Thomas Spencer
Wells (1818-97) of London. This great operator had been opening the
abdomen successfully for certain conditions since 1858. By 1867 his
methods were approaching the Listerian. Under Lister’s inspiration
he further improved his technique and did more than any other man to
raise the possibilities of abdominal surgery. Spencer Wells stands
out for the extreme simplicity, directness, and effectiveness of
his methods (Fig. 111), and for his exceptionally conscientious care
as an operator. His name is commonly attached to an instrument of
his invention of catching the bleeding ends of cut blood-vessels.
The familiar ‘Spencer Wells forceps’ is at this day probably more
frequently used than any other surgical instrument (Fig. 110).





Since the time of Lister many branches of Science have contributed to
the development of surgical technique. No addition to the surgical
armory has, however, been more important than that made by the
physicist Wilhelm Conrad Röntgen (1845-1923). In 1895 he found that
when an electric discharge passes through a high vacuum rays are
emitted that are far more penetrating than ordinary light. These rays
have since then been placed in series with light rays, ultra-violet
rays and infra-red rays, and it has been shown that they differ from
these only in their wave-length. The surgical application of the
Röntgen or X-rays was at once made to the examination of bone. Since
then the more accurate knowledge of the properties of these rays
has made them of value in exploring almost every organ of the body.
Radiography is now constantly applied in the diagnosis of medical and
surgical conditions of the organs of the chest and abdomen.

The more dramatic achievements of modern surgery, the drastic
operations that surgeons are now able to perform on the great cavities
of the body--head, chest, and abdomen--have attracted much public
attention. Nevertheless few surgical advances have relieved so much
suffering and disability as the unsensational development in the
treatment of fractures.

After the advent of Listerian methods the technique of the treatment
of compound fractures was gradually perfected. Simple fractures--which
are far commoner--continued, however, to be treated with splints in
the traditional fashion. Plaster of Paris bandages, which came into
wide use in the ’seventies, were some improvement; but prolonged
immobilization of a limb, in either splints or plaster bandages, always
involves much subsequent pain and stiffness, lasting, at best, for
months. To obviate this, Massage--a practice of immemorial antiquity
in Folk Medicine--had been introduced into Surgery in the sixteenth
century by Ambroise Paré (pp. 92-94). The subject was little heard
of till the last thirty years of the nineteenth century. The pioneer
was the Dutch surgeon Johann Mezger (1839-1900), through whom some
scientific advance was made.



The introduction of X-rays into Surgery made for very accurate
diagnosis of the state of fractures. It has thus gradually become
possible to treat a large proportion of these injuries without
immobilization either by splints or plaster. In many cases the injured
limb is merely held in correct position between sandbags and massage
used from the first. Much stiffness and disability is thereby avoided
and the length of the period of treatment greatly shortened. The rise
of a class of scientifically trained Masseurs has made possible a wider
application of this valuable curative procedure.

Improvements in methods of operation have been very numerous during
the last generation. Many can be appreciated only by those with
technical knowledge. In 1886 Ernst von Bergmann of Berlin (1836-1907)
introduced steam sterilization of dressings and thus moved toward the
replacement of antiseptic by aseptic methods. W. S. Halsted, then
of New York, had been working to the same end. In 1890, finding it
impossible to sterilize the hands completely, he introduced the rubber
gloves now universally employed by surgeons during operations. Much
important work in experimental surgery has been done by Alexis Carrel
of New York (1873-) and some of his laboratory methods have become
available in surgical practice. The technique of abdominal surgery has
been greatly advanced by many workers, important among whom are J. B.
Murphy (1857-1916) of Chicago and the brothers Charles and William Mayo
(1865 and 1861) of Rochester, Minnesota. The surgery of the brain was
prosecuted in England by Rickman Godlee (1849-1925), the nephew and
biographer of Lister, by Victor Horsley (1857-1916), and above all by
William Macewen (1848-1926), a successor to Lister’s chair at Glasgow
and one of the finest exponents of Listerian methods. The surgery of
the nervous system in general, and that of the brain in particular, has
been carried to extraordinary refinements in America by Harvey Cushing.
There can be no doubt that during the twentieth century advances in
Surgery have been more important and more numerous in the United States
than in any other country.




§ 10. _Bacteriology becomes a special Science._

We have seen the microbic view of the origin of disease demonstrated
as a reality by Pasteur (pp. 224-35) and extended to special disease
conditions by him and by Koch (pp. 229-32). While the French observer
stood above all men for the clearness and steadiness of his vision and
for his persistence and resource in following what he had seen from
afar, his German colleague had a genius for visualizing particulars
and for adapting mechanical devices and scientific discoveries to
particular ends. Koch thus vastly improved and elaborated the methods
for detecting and examining minute organisms. The significance of his
results was at once recognized, but the complexity of the technique
involved and the time and training necessary demanded the elevation of
the subject into the position of a special science.

Though but fifty years old, the science of Bacteriology has itself
undergone repeated subdivision. Noteworthy though the results of this
process of constant subdivision have proved, it must be emphasized
that the state of scientific subdivision cannot be final, and is
indeed without meaning unless it lead to a subsequent synthesis--an
event which we still await. It is the general Laws reached by these
special sciences that are philosophically important, and the specialist
himself is often ill-placed and ill-equipped for the estimation of the
true significance of such Laws. The philosophic thinker who deals with
generalities and centuries must often be content to pass the details in
silence. Nor is this true only of the professed philosopher. It applies
no less to the philosophical physician. It is his task to try to see
life steadily and see it whole. He must think both in terms of the
individual life and of the community life, and for him the results of
the bacteriologist, the physiologist, and of all their colleagues are
as means to an end. It is from this standpoint that we should seek to
visualize the fruits that bacteriological science in this last age has
laid at the feet of humanity.

With Koch’s work on Anthrax in 1876, on the bacteria that commonly
infect wounds in 1878, and with his great discovery of the bacillus
of Tuberculosis in 1882, the study of the infective diseases entered
on a new stage. The enemy had been seen and was now known for what he
was. The bacteriologist had succeeded in making prisoners. These had
been isolated and made to live in test-tubes. Moreover, the organisms
had been compelled to dwell alone without mixing with other species.
They had been obtained, as bacteriologists say, in ‘pure cultures’,
and delicate methods of detecting and differentiating them had been
developed. With a pure culture in his hands, the bacteriologist can
determine the influences favorable or unfavorable to the growth of the
disease organism, and he can investigate conditions that can exalt,
destroy, or modify its activity (p. 233).

An important series of criteria established by Koch have remained the
tests by which the disease-bearing character of these organisms can be
established. To prove that an organism is the inseparable cause of any
disease we need to demonstrate:

1. The constant presence of the organism in every case of the disease.

2. The preparation of a pure culture, which must be maintained for
repeated generations.

3. The reproduction of the disease in animals by means of a pure
culture removed by several generations from the organisms first
obtained.

These conditions have been fulfilled for many diseases. Evidently the
third test can be applied only in conditions to which animals other
than man are susceptible. Now in this matter the organisms that produce
disease vary greatly. Some, for instance those of Anthrax, are easily
conveyed to a variety of species of animals; others, for instance
those of Syphilis, are with difficulty conveyed to very few species of
animal; yet others, for instance human Malaria, cannot be conveyed to
any animal save man.

Some light is thrown on the life-history of the second and third
classes by recent discoveries. The science of Comparative Pathology,
that is the knowledge of the relations of the diseases of different
species of animals, is of very recent growth. It has already
demonstrated, however, the existence of organisms bearing some
resemblance, for instance, to those of human Syphilis and human Malaria
as the cause of disease in animals. By studying the life-history of
these organisms in animals and by studying their effect on animals,
valuable side-lights have often been thrown on the allied diseases in
man. Moreover, in exceptional cases and in some special diseases, it
has been possible to convey a disease experimentally to man.

A second important factor has gradually come into prominence with the
extension of bacteriological knowledge. It is evident that not all
men are subject to all human diseases. Even in the most destructive
epidemic there are some that escape. These lucky ones may be naturally
‘immune’. Many diseases, such as Measles, seldom recur in individuals
who have been infected, so our lucky ones may thus have an ‘Acquired
Immunity’.

The general nature of Immunity we shall presently discuss (p. 259),
but we note here that Immunity may be relative or absolute, and may,
moreover, vary according to the circumstances of the individual. Thus,
for instance, a well-fed, well-housed person of temperate habits,
living an open-air life, is unlikely to develop consumption. Restrict
his diet, confine him in an office, deteriorate his mode of life,
and he may well fall a victim to it. The investigation of facts such
as these on a large scale has demonstrated that the _soil_ in which
disease grows is of no less import than the _seed_ from which it grows.
The problem of disease causation is thus immensely complex. We are
only just beginning to draw up general laws on the subject, and in
approaching it we are beyond the frontiers of our positive knowledge.
Turned back from this difficult borderland, we must content ourselves
with surveying a part of the better-known territory and considering a
few specific bacteriological achievements. These we may now consider
under the headings of the diseases associated with them.


§ 11. _Some Important Bacteriological Results._

_Diphtheria_ is a disease for which physicians now habitually demand
a bacteriological diagnosis. Bretonneau of Tours (p. 185), working on
clinical and post-mortem material, and without the use of a microscope,
was able to distinguish Diphtheria as a specific disease (1826). Half
a century later (1883) Edwin Klebs (1834-1913) of Zürich, a pupil
of Virchow, described the specific organism of the disease. In the
following year Friedrich Loeffler (1852-1915), a Prussian and an
assistant of Koch, succeeded in cultivating it. The organism has since
been known as the ‘Klebs-Loeffler Bacillus’. Its study has thrown much
light on the nature of bacterial action in general and has, moreover,
led to important therapeutic developments (p. 263).

Of all diseases destructive of human life, none is so dramatic as
_Plague_, the scourge of mankind throughout history. The bacillus
of Plague was discovered independently by the Japanese Shibasaburo
Kitasato (_c._ 1860-), a pupil of Koch, and by the Frenchman Alexandre
Yersin (1863-), a pupil of Pasteur, during an epidemic at Hong Kong
in 1894. These two observers cultivated the organism and reproduced
the disease by inoculation of pure cultures in animals. It had long
been observed that outbreaks of a deadly disease of rats and mice
were liable to precede Human Plague. These ‘epizootics’ which precede
‘epidemics’ are now known to be due to the bacillus of Plague. A mass
of evidence has been collected to show that the normal carrier of
the Plague infection is the rat flea. This knowledge has led to the
formulation of effective measures for the control of Plague. These
measures are based on the wholesale extermination of the rat population
which harbors the infective fleas. The study of the Natural History
of the Plague Bacillus has also led to prophylactic measures for the
safety of individuals.





_Malta Fever_ is a disease of much wider distribution than its name
implies. Not only is it found throughout the Mediterranean area, but
it is also encountered in China, South Africa, and parts of both North
and South America. It is a long, tedious and wearing disease, and
though the mortality from it is low, yet it was at one time one of the
main causes of disability in the British army at Malta. In 1887 an
English military surgeon, David Bruce (1855-), succeeded in cultivating
a characteristic bacillus from the spleen of a patient dead of the
disease, and he established its causal relation to Malta Fever. In 1904
its mode of propagation was studied by a British Government Commission.
The goat was shown to be the normal host of the bacillus, and in Malta
50 per cent. of these animals were found to be infected. The disease,
it was discovered, is usually transmitted by goat’s milk. The knowledge
has led to the application of very effective precautions (Fig. 116).



Among the most anciently described diseases is the condition known as
_Tetanus_ or ‘Lockjaw’. There are unmistakable references to it in the
_Hippocratic Collection_ and notably in the _Aphorisms_. Two of these

references we have already quoted (p. 23). A general association
of Tetanus with wounds has long been recognized. In the eighties
the disease was shown to be transmissible from animal to animal. It
was, moreover, experimentally produced in animals by the inoculation
into them of garden mold. In 1889 Koch’s pupil, Kitasato, obtained
the Bacillus of Tetanus in pure culture and conveyed the disease to
animals. He found the organism would grow only in the absence of
Oxygen. It is, in fact, a type of a large and now well-known group,
the ‘anaerobic’ bacteria. The natural habitat of the Tetanus Bacillus
has been proved to be soil, and especially richly manured soil. The
knowledge of the bacillus, of its habitat, and of its mode of growth
has led to the development of a valuable protective process.

Looking backward from the standpoint of present-day knowledge we can
trace _Typhoid Fever_ far back in history. Nevertheless, it was not
till 1837 that the distinction between the two distinct conditions
known now as ‘Typhoid’ and ‘Typhus’ was first clearly made. This was
the work of an American physician, William Gerhard (1809-72), of
Philadelphia. The English were backward in adopting the distinction.
The organic cause of Typhoid Fever was first seen in 1880 by Karl
Joseph Eberth (1835-1927), a pupil of Virchow, and after him it is
known as ‘Eberth’s Bacillus’. It was not isolated, however, until some
years later. It is an inhabitant of the intestine, and its natural
history was obscured by confusion with certain other and very similar
organisms, which also dwell in the intestine. These have now been
fairly differentiated from each other, and in the course of this
process the ‘flora’, both normal and pathological, of the intestinal
canal has become well known. Moreover, it has been shown that typhoid
organisms are not always of the same species, but that several
closely allied forms produce several closely allied diseases. Lastly,
certain of the effects wrought by the typhoid group of organisms on
the body, which is their host, have been exactly investigated. These
investigations have led to improved methods of recognition of the
disease, that is to say, _diagnosis_, and also of prevention of its
incidence, that is to say, _prophylaxis_. To these methods of diagnosis
and of prophylaxis we now turn.






§ 12. _The Study of Immunity._

In the production of disease by living organisms two main factors
are involved. There is, firstly, the multiplication of the organisms
themselves, and there is, secondly, the production by the organisms
of poisonous substances or _toxins_. The former phenomena are spoken
of as _infection_, the results of the latter come under the title of
_intoxication_ or _toxic_ effects. The first toxins to be investigated
were those isolated from putrefying substance and named _ptomaines_
(1876, by false formation from Greek _ptoma_ ‘a corpse’). These are, in
fact, definite chemical substances of the group known to chemists as
‘alkaloids’ (p. 325). Later, toxins were prepared from actual disease
organisms such as those of Typhoid and Tetanus (1888). The method was
introduced of filtering the bacteria away from their fluid cultures
and thus obtaining a bacterium-free liquid containing the poisonous
bacterial products. This was the starting point of the scientific
study of toxins. These, it soon became clear, were either substances
which were normally sent out by the bacteria, _exotoxins_, or they
were normally retained within the bacteria and could only be obtained
in solution by breaking up the bodies of the bacteria, _endotoxins_.
The use of these toxins has been essential for the scientific study of
Immunity.

The word _Immunity_ is derived from a Latin word which means ‘exemption
from military service’. In Medicine it indicates an exemption, relative
or absolute, from the incidence of a disease. Immunity in the medical
sense is of various kinds. There is ‘species immunity’, some species
not being liable to diseases to which others fall victims. There is
relative and there is absolute immunity. There is innate and acquired
immunity. Of acquired immunity there is a natural immunity resulting
from the ordinary contraction of a disease, and there is an ‘artificial
immunity’. It is only artificial immunity that is in the hands of the
physician.

Artificial immunity itself is of two kinds, and both kinds are of use
and of importance in Medicine. There is an _Active Immunity_, which is
produced directly by injection of disease organisms or their products.
It is found, however, that if a high degree of active immunity be
attained the blood serum of the immunized animal, when injected into a
second animal, may itself produce a state of immunity. The state thus
indirectly produced is described as _Passive Immunity_.

The early observers found that when organisms are cultivated outside
the body they lose their virulence to a greater or less degree. Pasteur
found this for Chicken Cholera (p. 234). He found, moreover, that such
‘attenuated cultures’, when inoculated, protect against the disease.
By the use of attenuated cultures he succeeded in establishing a state
of ‘Active Immunity’ against Chicken Cholera. But there are many other
ways of attenuating the virulence of an organism. Thus, in 1882,
Pasteur showed that to grow Anthrax bacilli at a high temperature would
reduce their virulence. These bacilli of reduced virulence could be
injected into a sheep. They would give the animal the disease in a mild
form and protect it against further attacks of the disease. They acted,
in fact, in the same way as did the old ‘Inoculation’ of Small-Pox (p.
183).

It has been found, however, that the same kind of immunity which is
produced by administering attenuated cultures is sometimes given even
by dead cultures. Nearly all active immunization is therefore done by
inoculating such killed cultures. These are usually called ‘Vaccines’
from the analogy which they bear to vaccination. The most familiar and
effective ‘vaccine’ is that against Typhoid. Moreover, it has been
found that in certain cases the principle of the induction of Active
Immunity may be applied directly in the treatment of disease. The
conditions that respond best to this line of treatment are those which
present some localized infection, such as a boil or carbuncle. In such
cases we must suppose that, while the local capacity for resistance
is lowered, yet reserves of resistance in other parts of the body can
be brought into play. These reserves are called up by the signal that
reaches them by the reaction of the body against the Vaccine.

It has been shown that, for the production of Active Immunity, the
actual bodies of the disease organisms are not always necessary. In
some cases, toxins obtained from these disease organisms are themselves
sufficient to induce Active Immunity. The matter may become of great
medical importance in the future and is already applied for Diphtheria
(p. 265).

We turn to ‘Passive Immunity’. The fact that Immunity can be
transferred from one animal to another via the serum proves that the
immunizing serum contains substances antagonistic to the bacterium
or toxin against which immunity is conveyed. These antagonistic
substances are spoken of as _Antibodies_. A series of very important
observations on Antibodies has been made, and may in time profoundly
modify not only our views of Disease but also our whole conception
of the workings of the living body. We find that it is not only
toxins that stimulate the formation of antibodies. Antibodies can be
elicited also by the introduction into the tissues of the living body
of red blood corpuscles, of embryonic tissue, and of various soluble
tissue-constituents of animal or vegetable origin. We are still only
on the threshold of the investigation of this subject, which may be as
important philosophically as it is therapeutically.


§ 13. _Some Practical Applications of Immunity._

We may now consider a few special applications of our knowledge of the
defences against bacterial action.

_Diphtheria_ is a disease in which the characteristic organisms are
found only locally, and in artificially produced cases only at the
site of inoculation. It therefore seemed probable from the first that
the symptoms were due not to the organisms themselves but to poisons
that they threw off, that is to their ‘exotoxins’. This was given
demonstrational form in 1889 by two pupils of Pasteur, Pierre Roux
(1853-) and Alexandre Yersin (1863-), who investigated many of the
properties of these toxins. In the following year (1890) Emil von
Behring (1854-1917), a Prussian Army Surgeon, and Kitasato showed that
it was possible to produce a Passive Immunity against Tetanus by a
serum from an infected animal, the immunity being efficient against 300
times the fatal dose of Tetanus. Their paper contains for the first
time the word _antitoxic_. Immediately after, von Behring showed that
against Diphtheria, too, immunity could be obtained by injecting serum
from an animal that had been previously injected with living cultures
of the Diphtheria bacillus. This epoch-making discovery of von Behring
was soon given a practical application. It was found possible to induce
a degree of immunity even after the onset of the disease. The first
human case was a child in a clinic at Berlin in 1891. Antidiphtheritic
serum was placed on the market in 1892. In a few years’ time its
administration had become a routine part of the treatment of the
disease. Diphtheria antitoxin is one of the greatest additions to
therapeutics. With competent administration the case mortality of
Diphtheria is one-half or one-quarter of what it is without the use of
Antidiphtheritic serum. (Fig. 119.)



An important aspect of the reaction of the body to the Diphtheria toxin
was revealed by B. Schick of Vienna in 1908. The technique of inducing
it was perfected by him in 1913, and the test is known by his name.
He showed that susceptibility to the disease could be detected by the
behavior of the skin after injection of minute doses into it. It has
thus been found that new-born infants are seldom susceptible and that
the proportion of susceptibles increases up to two years of age, but
that then it diminishes. The actual proportions of susceptibles, as
estimated in a large number of cases in New York City in 1919, are as
follows:

                   Of those under 3 months  15%   are susceptible
  Of those between  3 months and  6 months  30%   are susceptible
  Of those between  6 months and  1 year    60%   are susceptible
  Of those between  1 year   and  2 years   70%   are susceptible
  Of those between  2 years  and  3 years   60%   are susceptible
  Of those between  3 years  and  5 years   40%   are susceptible
  Of those between  5 years  and 10 years   30%   are susceptible
  Of those between 10 years  and 20 years   20%   are susceptible
                   Of those over 20 years   15%   are susceptible

These figures show why Diphtheria is mainly a disease of childhood
and is relatively seldom encountered in adults. They also make it
evident that steps for protecting individuals against contracting the
disease--‘prophylactic measures’ as they are called--need only be taken
with a fraction of the population. The useful term _Prophylaxis_ is
derived from a Greek word meaning a watchman or guard. It is used to
describe preventive measures against disease in general, but is more
specially applied to that form of protection which is achieved through
the artificial production of Immunity.

Such prophylactic measures are now available against Diphtheria.
They differ from those in use against any other disease, since the
substance injected is neither the living infective material as in
vaccination against Small-pox (p. 184), nor is it a killed culture of
the organisms as in immunization against Typhoid (p. 268), nor is it
the serum of an immunized animal as in the protective measures against
Tetanus (p. 267). The Toxin itself (mixed with an experimentally
determined proportion of its antitoxin) is now in wide and effective
use as a prophylactic against Diphtheria. The method was proposed by
von Behring (cp. p. 264) in 1913. The details, however, have since
been worked out in the laboratories of the New York City Department
of Public Health and have been mainly the work of W. H. Park (1863-).
The susceptibles are first determined by the Schick test and are then
immunized against the disease. The immunization reduces the likelihood
of contracting the disease to about one quarter.

Plague differs from Diphtheria in that the organisms, instead of
being local, pullulate throughout the body of the victim. As in the
case of most diseases of this type, the toxins of Plague are chiefly
_endotoxins_, unlike those of Diphtheria, which are _exotoxins_
(p. 263). Thus, the filtrate of a culture of Plague Bacilli is but
little toxic and confers little or no immunity. Protective vaccines
of a killed culture of Plague Bacilli are, however, prepared, and
these confer considerable immunity. It is claimed that they reduce
the liability to the disease by about three-quarters, and the case
mortality by about one-half. Prophylactic inoculation against Plague
is associated especially with the name of the Russian investigator
Waldemar Haffkine (1860-), a pupil of Pasteur, who was for many years
in the service of the British Government in India, the Plague center of
the world.

After Diphtheria one of the earliest diseases of which the toxins were
investigated was _Tetanus_. Kitasato found in 1891 that the filtrates
of pure cultures injected into animals are very toxic. A peculiar
feature is the incubation period of some days that occurs between
the inoculation and the advent of the symptoms. This fact had been
referred to, more than two thousand years earlier, in the _Aphorisms_
of Hippocrates (p. 23). Moreover, it has been found that, soon after
inoculation, the Tetanus toxin disappears from the blood-stream. This,
it has been shown, is due to its affinity for nervous tissue, with
which it rapidly enters into some sort of combination. The fact is of
clinical significance and of therapeutic application.

By injection of small and progressively increasing doses of Tetanus
toxin into animals, a high and long-lasting degree of immunity to
the disease is produced. The serum of such immunized animals has the
capacity to protect animals susceptible to the disease against an
injection of a fatal dose. It is now a routine treatment to inject
serum derived from an immunized horse into those who have wounds likely
to result in Tetanus. Owing to the rapid disappearance of the Tetanus
toxin from the blood-stream, and owing to its tendency to unite with
nervous tissue, it is important to inject the serum as soon as possible
after the infliction of the wound. In some cases it is advisable to
inject the serum into the sheath that surrounds the spinal cord in
order to give it as rapid access to the nervous centers as possible.
During the Great War prophylactic doses of Antitetanic Serum were given
to every wounded man after 1914. Before the practice was adopted, the
incidence of Tetanus among the wounded was 16 per 1,000. After the
introduction of this line of treatment as a routine, the incidence fell
to 2 per 1,000. Countless lives were thus saved. Antitetanic serum
should be injected as early as possible in every case of a large ragged
wound, especially if contaminated with soil.

_Typhoid Fever_ differs from Diphtheria, Plague, and Tetanus in that
it can hardly be conveyed to animals. It has thus proved impracticable
to produce anything in the way of passive immunity in man. On the other
hand, there is no disease in which the production of active immunity
by means of Vaccines of dead cultures has been attended with more
favorable results. The researches which led up to the introduction
of active immunization against Typhoid Fever are bound up with
investigations concerning the diagnosis of the disease which are of
wide importance in connection with several other diseases.

The discovery of Antibodies (p. 262) gave rise to great activity in
their investigation. Among the most interesting and important of the
antibodies is a group which will cause ‘agglutination’ or clumping
of the disease organisms with which they are specially associated.
This reaction is specific for the corresponding organisms, within
certain limitations. Given, therefore, (1) a pure culture of an
organism, and (2) the knowledge of the highest degree of dilution of
the serum containing such an antibody that will cause agglutination of
that particular organism, the physician has in his hands a means of
detecting or excluding infection with that organism. The method was
especially studied by the Parisian investigator Fernand Widal (1862-),
who in 1896 succeeded in making it practicable for Typhoid Fever, and
his name is attached to the test. It is now universally applied in that
disease. Similar tests have been devised for Malta Fever and for other
conditions.

There are other groups of antibodies that have been investigated. Some
of these possess the power of dissolving the corresponding organism.
They are, therefore, known as _Bacteriolysins_. Their existence
gives a certain insight into the defensive mechanism of the animal
body against bacterial invasion. They are sometimes of practical use
in distinguishing types of disease-producing bacteria. The method
is applicable, for example, in detecting certain types of dysentery
organisms.

Another group of antibodies act not against bacteria but against
certain specific substances. Antibodies of this type were first
detected by the Belgian workers Jules Bordet (1870-) and Octave Gengou
(1875-) in the year 1900. The physician avails himself of the existence
of such an antibody in the test that is applied for Syphilis, which was
introduced in 1904 by Ehrlich’s pupil, August von Wassermann (1866-),
and is known by his name.

Of late years a special aspect of Immunity has come into view in
connection with the so-called ‘Carrier Problem.’ With many diseases,
acquisition of Immunity on the part of the patient implies the death
within his body of the organism that has been causing the disease.
There are conditions, however, in which the organisms may lurk in some
individuals long after the symptoms have subsided. These persons may
even contract the disease so lightly that they are unconscious of it,
but nevertheless they become capable of conveying it. Such individuals
are known as _carriers_. Evidently the existence of carriers introduces
special difficulty into attempts to delimit an infective disease in any
population.

Among the diseases of known bacterial origin that are sometimes
conveyed by carriers are Typhoid Fever, Diphtheria, and Spotted Fever
or Cerebrospinal Meningitis. A special case of the Carrier Problem is
afforded by Infantile Paralysis, a disease due to ‘ultra-microscopic’
organism--since the virus is ‘filtrable’ (p. 274). This disease, like
that of Cerebrospinal Meningitis, is probably transmitted by carriers
who do not themselves suffer.

Typhoid Fever, Diphtheria, Influenza, Scarlet Fever, and many other
conditions are often conveyed by ‘ambulant’ cases. This term is applied
to those cases which, while definitely suffering from a disease, do
not regard themselves as ill enough to take to their beds but continue
their ordinary avocations. Such ambulant cases are not less but more
dangerous to their neighbors than those more severely stricken.

The whole study of the Carrier Problem is in its infancy. It is beset
with extraordinary difficulties. In the case of Diphtheria and Typhoid
Fever, however, the demonstration that a suspected individual is or is
not a ‘carrier’ is easy. The difficulty is to trace him in the first
instance!


§ 14. _The Conquest of the Tropics._

Nowhere in Medicine has the rational spirit been more triumphantly
vindicated than in connection with the diseases peculiar to hot
countries. The increase in the habitability of the Tropics may be
traced to two main causes. First is the application of the ordinary
laws of Hygiene. Second is the increasingly exact knowledge of the
microbic origin of tropical diseases, leading to a more complete
apprehension and a stricter application of the laws of Hygiene.

We have glanced at the great changes wrought in the social
organization of temperate countries by the rise of modern Hygiene (pp.
172-78), which commenced to be felt about the middle of the eighteenth
century. The death-rate then began to fall, and has fallen steadily
ever since. The mid-eighteenth century marks, for temperate countries,
the end of the ‘Middle Ages’ of Hygiene. But with the advent of the
modern period the fall in the death-rate in temperate countries has not
been the only change in the public health. Even more significant is a
change in the _causes_ of death.

Certain diseases have gradually receded from the more civilized and
settled temperate countries, and are now almost unknown there. Thus,
Malaria, Plague, Typhus, Leprosy and Dysentery, once of world-wide
distribution, have come to be regarded as more or less distinctively
‘tropical’ diseases. A time is approaching when we shall be able
to place other diseases with which temperate countries are still
afflicted, such as Typhoid Fever, in the same category. The ultimate
exclusion of Typhoid as a disease of civilized communities is suggested
by the death-rates of England and Wales.


_Average Annual Death-rate in England and Wales from Typhoid per
million living._

  1871-80  1881-90  1891-1900  1901-10  1911-20  1921-26
    332      198       174        91       35       24

In the category of such removable diseases which, being excluded from
temperate countries, are regarded as tropical are Malaria, Plague,
Typhus, Leprosy, and certain forms of Dysentery. These diseases are
‘tropical’ only in the sense that it is in the Tropics that the general
hygienic conditions most favorable to their development are still
found. If the hygienic conditions of the Tropics could be raised to
those of the civilized temperate countries--a task, it is true, of very
great difficulty--these particular diseases might become as rare there
as they are with us. Indeed, it is possible to foresee a world in which
a number of these so-called tropical diseases will have disappeared
altogether.

There are, however, other diseases that are tropical in another sense.
Such diseases have seldom or never visited the shores of temperate
countries, or at least have obtained no lasting foothold there, even
when the conditions have been favorable to them. Among such diseases
are Yellow Fever, Sleeping Sickness (which must not be confused with
the so-called ‘Sleepy Sickness’), Beri-Beri, Dengue, Sprue, Kalar-azar,
and a host of other less known conditions.

It must be said, to avoid misunderstanding, that ‘the Tropics’ in the
medical sense is a region considerably wider and far less well-defined
than the geographical Tropics. Moreover, despite the existence of
diseases peculiar to the Tropics, ‘tropical diseases’ form no natural
group based on any common organic causation. The organisms that give
rise to the various ‘tropical diseases’ differ from one another just
as much as the organisms that give rise to the diseases of temperate
countries.

Since we cannot speak of tropical diseases on the basis of their
common causation, we are forced to deal with them as separate entities
and especially from the point of view of their prevention. We will
therefore select two diseases, the history of which illustrates the
process by which the Tropics have been rendered safer both for European
and for native races. These will serve as types, and we will choose
one from the truly tropical group which does not invade temperate
climes, and the other from the group which is being gradually excluded
from temperate climes. No better instances of these two groups can be
adduced than Yellow Fever and Malaria.




(a) _Yellow Fever._

In discussing the history of Yellow Fever, as of many other conditions,
it is perhaps best to begin at the end, for modern knowledge of the
organic cause of a disease often illumines and gives a meaning to
historical records.

In 1918 the Japanese investigator Noguchi observed a very delicate
and minute spiral organism in the blood of a case of Yellow Fever at
Guayaquil, the principal port of Ecuador, on the West Coast of South
America, one of the most important endemic centers of the disease.
Noguchi showed that guinea-pigs inoculated with the blood of this
infected case developed symptoms similar to those of Yellow Fever, and
he was able to demonstrate the same organism in the sick guinea-pigs.
He passed the disease by means of inoculation from one guinea-pig
to another. He succeeded in obtaining pure cultures of the organism
on artificial media. He passed such cultures through a series of
guinea-pigs and finally recovered it in pure culture again. He showed
that different strains vary greatly in virulence, a fact in accord with
the great variability in the gravity of attacks of Yellow Fever.

One of the reasons why the discovery of this organism has been so long
delayed is doubtless the very small numbers in the blood of patients
suffering from Yellow Fever. Thus, the toxins must be extremely
powerful. Indeed, it has been shown that 1/10,000 of a cubic centimeter
of a virulent culture rapidly induces fatal symptoms in a guinea-pig.

There are other important points about the Yellow Fever organism. It
passes through a stage in which it is so small as to be beyond the
reach even of microscopic vision. This fact is known because the blood
of a Yellow Fever patient is infective when passed through any but
the finest filters. The organism in fact exists in what is called a
‘Filter-Passing’ stage. Of late years a number of infective diseases
have been shown to be due to filter-passing organisms of this type.
Among them is the organism of the disease known as Infantile Paralysis
(p. 270). The study of ‘filter-passers’ bids fair to be in itself a
special science.

Finally, Noguchi threw light on the nature of Yellow Fever epidemics.
He was able to pass the parasite from one guinea-pig to another, not
only by inoculation in the ordinary way, but also by means of the bite
of a species of mosquito which has long been known to be the carrier
of the disease for man. He showed that a period of some twelve days’
duration within the body of the insect is necessary for the parasite
again to develop its dangerous phase. The period of incubation in
man, that is, the time that passes between the infective insect bite
and the appearance of the disease, is 3-5 days, but 12-14 days is the
period that usually elapses after the introduction of a case of the
disease before other cases occur. The discrepancy is now explained.
The disease is not infectious except through the mosquito, so the
developmental period of the parasite within the mosquito corresponds to
the incubation period of the epidemic.

Outbreaks of Yellow Fever have struck the public imagination, have
given rise to folk tales and have inspired poets. The story of the
_Flying Dutchman_ is that of a ship stricken with Yellow Fever. The
specter ship is supposed by sailors to haunt the seas around the Cape
of Good Hope, and to bode ill for those who see it. A murder was
committed on the ship, and following it ‘Yellow Jack’ broke out. All
ports were closed to the wretched crew, who finally all died of the
disease. The _Flying Dutchman_ was the subject of an opera by Wagner
and a novel by Marryat. A picture of a ship smitten by Yellow Jack is
to be found in Coleridge’s _Ancient Mariner_.

An historic case may be quoted. In 1837 a barque named _Huskisson_ was
at Sierra Leone. She was lading when Yellow Fever appeared among the
crew. All but two or three died. Yellow Fever broke out in the colony,
but gradually died down. The _Huskisson_, in the meantime, remained in
harbor without hands for three months. At last, hands were obtained,
tempted by very high pay. Again the Yellow Fever broke out among them
and again nearly all died. They were bitten by infected mosquitoes
which remained in the ship during the three months. Many cases, no
less dramatic, are on record. The disease is among those which are
peculiarly common and fatal among medical men. Thus, Senegal has twice
been denuded of medical men by Yellow Fever. In 1830 six died out of
twelve, and in 1878 twenty-two out of twenty-seven.

An attack of Yellow Fever confers Immunity. In children it assumes a
mild form, and therefore, in countries where the disease is endemic,
the population consists largely of the survivors of attacks. On this
account terrible outbreaks of the _Flying Dutchman_ or _Ancient
Mariner_ type are always either on immigrant ships or in places which
have remained long unvisited by the disease, in other words such
outbreaks occur under conditions in which immune persons are few or
absent.

The distribution of the Yellow Fever mosquito is wider than the
distribution of Yellow Fever at the present day, but Yellow Fever is
never found, save in sporadic outbreaks, where the mosquito cannot live
permanently. The distribution of the mosquito corresponds, however,
to the areas where the disease has in the past, from time to time,
established itself, but is smaller than the area wherein sporadic
outbreaks have been reported.

During the seventeenth and eighteenth and even the nineteenth century
there were repeated outbreaks of Yellow Fever far beyond the region to
which it is now confined. Along the eastern shores of North America it
has at times extended as far north as New York, and there have been
destructive outbreaks in Baltimore, Philadelphia, and even Boston. The
disease has been found along most of the littoral of South America. In
the Old World it has visited chiefly West Africa, where it was imported
very early by the slave trade. It has visited at times Spain, Portugal,
and Italy with devastating epidemics, and has even occasionally made a
call in France and once in England. The last considerable outbreak in
Europe was at Madrid in 1878.

England has always had important interests in the West Indies. During
the eighteenth and first half of the nineteenth century she had,
moreover, large military establishments there, which were regarded as
very bad stations. In Thackeray’s _Vanity Fair_, which refers to the
period just after the Napoleonic wars, the disreputable and unfortunate
Rawdon Crawley is sent as governor to ‘Coventry Island’ in the West
Indies, and is not expected to last long! There are many historic
occasions on which the British forces in the West Indies lost almost
incredible numbers from Yellow Jack, garrisons being practically wiped
out. In Jamaica the mean annual mortality in the garrison was for many
years 185 per 1,000! In the Bermudas the mortality was about 80 per
1,000. One should remember that soldiers are picked men in the prime of
life, and that these mortality rates were in places now regarded as
health resorts! A hundred years ago, Jamaica had the highest death-rate
in the Empire, with the exception of West Africa, where the mean annual
mortality of whites at Sierra Leone was 362 per 1,000!

Conditions in the West Indies began to improve definitely from about
1850 onwards. At that time there was no effective knowledge of the
organic cause of Yellow Fever, nor, for that matter, of any other
tropical disease. Only lately has the basic reason for this early
improvement become obvious. From about 1850 onwards the water-supply
in the more settled parts of the West Indies, and notably in the
larger towns, came to be arranged by pipes. Now these towns were the
special resorts of the Yellow Fever mosquito. The removal of open
standing water, the enclosure of water-supplies, and the introduction
of ordinary modern sanitation in the clearing away of rubbish, did good
work without any knowledge of the organic cause of the disease.

We now know the life-course of the Yellow Fever mosquito. We know
her breeding habits and how the water-living larvae congregate
specially in the small collections of water in the neighborhood of
houses. Precautions have been taken against them and under favorable
circumstances the disease has completely disappeared in well-managed
districts under British and American control. The romantic story of
the destruction of Yellow Fever in the Panama zone, in Cuba, Puerto
Rico, Jamaica, Barbadoes, Trinidad, New Orleans, has been too often
recited to be detailed again. Every one has heard of the tragic event
in connection with the American Mosquito Commission of 1900 and of the
death of Lazear. He and his colleagues, led by Walter Reed (1851-1902),
finally proved that the disease is never conveyed by bedding, or by
clothes, or by other objects, but always and only, in nature, by the
bite of an infected mosquito.

During the experiments of the American Commission, cases of Yellow
Fever were produced in volunteers by bites of infected mosquitoes, by
injection of blood of infected patients, and by injection of _filtered_
blood serum of infected patients (p. 74). With this knowledge in his
hands, the American chief sanitary officer of Havana, William C. Gorgas
(1854-1920), began to destroy mosquitoes systematically and to treat
all Yellow Fever patients under mosquito nets. Within three months
Havana was free from Yellow Fever for the first time for one hundred
and fifty years. These wonderful results are brought out by a table:


_Deaths in Havana from Yellow Fever._

  _Year._  _Deaths._ _Year._ _Deaths._
  1885       165     1895       553
  1886       161     1896     1,282
  1887       532     1897       858
  1888       468     1898       136
  1889       303     1899       103
  1890       308     1900       310
  1891       356     1901        18
  1892       357     1902         0
  1893       496     1903         0
  1894       382     1904         0

Except for the semi-civilized states of Central and South America,
Yellow Fever is now generally under control. It is perhaps not always
realized, however, that, while the local extinction of this disease
may be among the future triumphs of modern science, its substantial
control over large areas is part of the history of world hygiene (p.
278), and that it is part of the very same movement that has made our
own cities healthier and more habitable than they were in the Middle
Ages.


(b) _Malaria._

The history of Malaria, which is also carried by a mosquito, is very
different from that of Yellow Fever. Malaria was, till recent times,
a disease of temperate as well as of tropical countries. The old name
for the disease is _Ague_. The word _Malaria_ is of no great antiquity
in the English language. It came into use only in the eighteenth
century. Like the word _Influenza_, it is of Italian origin, and,
like _Influenza_, it carries with it a forgotten pathological theory.
_Malaria_ is simply _mal aria_, that is, ‘bad air’. So _Influenza_
is _the influence_, that is to say, the influence of unpropitious
planets or comets that were held to rain down poison into the air. It
was believed that these diseases were the result of local atmospheric
conditions. In Rome and the Campagna the natives still believe that
just as the sun goes down the air becomes specially poisonous.

While the _term_ Malaria is comparatively modern, nevertheless,
recognizable accounts of the _condition_ are perhaps more ancient
than those of any other disease. Of all diseases produced by
micro-organisms, Malaria has perhaps changed its type least during the
course of historic time. The disease is distinctly described in several
places in the _Hippocratic Collection_.

The conception of diseases as separate entities is, of course, modern.
In the case of most infectious diseases, therefore, we cannot hope
to follow the history very far back. But the symptoms associated
with a malarial attack are so definite that there is no difficulty
in tracing the disease with certainty as far back as 1000 B.C. The
real division into ancient and modern times comes, for this disease,
with the use of Cinchona, which is the plant from which Quinine (p.
326) is now derived. Very soon after the introduction of Cinchona in
the seventeenth century, fevers came to be habitually divided into
those which respond to Cinchona and those which do not. Cinchona--and
therefore its derivative, Quinine--is one of the drugs that we owe
to the discovery of the New World (p. 95). The rind of the Cinchona
tree was taken as a remedy by the aborigines. In Europe, where it was
introduced by Jesuit missionaries, it became known as ‘Jesuits’ bark’.
It was popularized by Sydenham (p. 100) and has ever since been widely
used in medicine.



Sydenham gave a good description of Malaria. During the seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries epidemic after epidemic of ‘Ague’ swept over
England as over other European countries. These epidemics spread from
their endemic centers, the low-lying ill-drained, swampy districts,
where the Malaria mosquito could breed freely in the slowly flowing
water. Of such places the principal in England were the Fens of
Cambridgeshire, Lincolnshire, and the surrounding counties, the marshes
on either side of the estuary of the Thames in Kent and Essex, the
marshes of Romney and Pevensey on the South coast, and those around
Bridgewater near the Bristol Channel (Fig. 122). There Malaria was
never absent, though it differed greatly in prevalence and severity in
different years. Ague remained prevalent in London as late as 1859.
The proportion of ague cases to the total number of in-patients and
out-patients at St. Thomas’s Hospital in London from 1850-60 varied
from between 12 per 1,000 at lowest to over 60 per 1,000 at highest.
Thus, over one-twentieth of the patients in a large London hospital
suffered from what we now regard as a tropical disease, within the
lifetime of men who are still with us!

In London the rise in the value of land led to the erection of the
Thames Embankment, which effectually reclaimed the land around
the river. Extensive works of drainage were at the same time being
undertaken in other infested districts. These soon had their now
well-known effect. In 1864 Malaria was found to be rapidly diminishing
everywhere, and to have left many of its old haunts. The disease
retreated rapidly. At the beginning of the twentieth century a
systematic search was made for a native case in England. After much
labor one single case was at last found. It may safely be prophesied
that native Malaria will never again be anything but a rare disease in
any temperate country with an efficient sanitary service.

The story of the discovery of the malarial parasite is worth
recounting. These organisms inhabit the red blood corpuscles and
were first seen by Alphonse Laveran (1845-) in 1880 in Algiers. His
observations were extended by French and Italian observers, who showed
that the sudden rise in temperature in Malaria coincides with a process
of division of the parasite. Later the suggestion that the parasite
might be conveyed to man by the mosquito was made by Patrick Manson
(1844-1922). The matter was clinched in 1898 by Ronald Ross (1857-),
who showed that the malarial parasite necessarily passes through a
stage in the stomach of the mosquito. The process was first traced by
Ross in a malarial parasite that is peculiar to certain birds, and
was subsequently demonstrated for the allied species of parasite that
produces human Malaria.

We have here an illustration of the value of comparative pathological
studies. Since the demonstration of the life-cycles of the malarial
parasites of man (Fig. 123), the chief attention of hygienists
interested in

Malaria has been directed to the mosquito (Fig. 124). Controlling the
breeding of the mosquito has proved the best method of reducing the
incidence of the disease. Engineering and sanitary works in some places
previously infested with Malaria have had the effect of almost entirely
eliminating disease. The classical instance is the Panama zone, where,
as is well known, the two mosquito-born diseases, Yellow Fever and
Malaria, have disappeared. There are now many areas in the Tropics,
previously infested, in which the disease is almost unknown. There are
many devices for dealing with the mosquito larvae.

By advances such as have been made in the knowledge of Yellow Fever and
Malaria, those areas of the Tropics which are under proper sanitary
control have become far safer habitats. There is good hope of an early
and rapid extension of the process, ultimately rendering new areas of
the Tropics suitable for permanent habitation by the white races and
healthier and happier places for the colored.








§ 15. _The Changed View of Insanity._

Insanity is as old as History. The Bible, Homer, and the _Hippocratic
Collection_, for instance, recount numerous examples of the disease.
Until the nineteenth century there was practically no scientific
knowledge of the conditions classed as insanity. Nevertheless,
hospitals for the insane were instituted at an early date. A well-known
instance is Bethlem Hospital or _Bedlam_ in London, which was developed
as an insane asylum in the fourteenth century.

The new era in the treatment of insanity begins with the abolition of
the old system of restraint. This was primarily due to two noble-minded
men, one a Frenchman and the other an Englishman. Philippe Pinel
(1745-1826), physician at the Bicêtre and afterwards at the Salpêtrière
at Paris, at great personal risk both to his life and liberty,
insisted on freeing from their chains the unfortunate lunatics under
his charge. His _Medico-philosophical Treatise on Mental Alienation_
(1791) was devoted to championing the humaner treatment of the insane.
His contemporary, the Quaker philanthropist William Tuke (1732-1822),
succeeded in 1792 in establishing at York a small retreat for the
insane, where the antiquated, unnecessary and cruel restraints were
abolished (Fig. 127).

While Pinel was beginning the humaner treatment of insanity in France,
considerable interest was aroused in the subject in Germany. There,
however, the medical profession was still under the influence of the
mystical Stahl (pp. 132-3), who regarded all forms of insanity as
perversions of the moral tendencies of the soul, produced by sin!

In France Pinel was succeeded in 1810 by Jean Étienne Dominique
Esquirol (1772-1840). The influence of Esquirol was as radical for
the scientific study of the subject as had been that of Pinel for the
humane treatment of the sufferers. Esquirol threw himself into the
task of founding properly conducted asylums, and he produced in 1838
his monumental work _On Mental Diseases considered in their Medical,
Hygienic, and Legal relations_. It is the first important, rational,
scientific treatise on the subject. Esquirol abandoned the barren type
of speculation that had characterized previous works on the subject
and devoted himself to the systematic collection of data. He was able
to sketch out some of the main forms of insanity, including that now
known as ‘General Paralysis of the Insane’. This disease was finally
differentiated by one of his pupils. Another pupil of Esquirol was the
first to succeed in the training of idiots. The main school of French
alienists is descended from Esquirol. In the early forties his work
resulted in the foundation of journals and societies devoted to the
study of Insanity in France, England, the United States, and Germany.

England was behind France in her treatment of the Insane. Not until
1828 were there proper laws governing their certification. In 1844 the
great and good Lord Shaftesbury (1801-85), the seventh Earl, brought in
his Bill establishing the Board of Lunacy Commissioners with the duty
of inspecting all lunatic asylums. It was a subject to which that great
philanthropist gave much thought. The same period saw also an awakening
in the United States, where Miss Dorothea Lynde Dix (1802-87) carried
on a very successful campaign for the better treatment of the insane
and the establishment of proper houses for their reception. Her labors
resulted in the foundation of many asylums on a reformed model in the
United States and Canada. In 1845 the provision of asylums out of the
local rates was made compulsory on the local Justices in England.

The late sixties and early seventies saw in every country a further
change for the better in the treatment of the Insane. The causes of
this improvement were two. On the one hand, Insanity came generally
to be recognized as a group of diseases which, like other diseases,
have usually a traceable physical basis. On the other hand, the great
improvement of the system of nursing under the inspiration of Florence
Nightingale (pp. 298-300) began to reach the asylums. In 1877 there
was a Parliamentary investigation into the care of the Insane in
England and Wales, and in 1890 the duties of asylum administration were
transferred from the Justices to the County Councils. This has resulted
in an immense improvement in the accommodation and treatment of the
insane poor in England. At the same time the order of a magistrate
became necessary for the consignment of a private patient to an asylum.
In 1913 provision was made for the mentally defective, who do not come
within the Lunacy Act. Lastly, with the establishment of a Ministry of
Health in 1917, the general control of the Insane has passed to that
body.

Many types of insanity have been traced to an organic cause in the
Nervous System itself. The Morbid Anatomy, both coarse and microscopic,
of some of these diseases has become recognized. Chief among them is
the well-known condition known as ‘General Paralysis of the Insane’.
During the intensive study of the factors in the causation of Insanity
it has become clear that in some groups, as in General Paralysis, which
is always preceded by Syphilis, a ‘toxic cause’ is at work. Other
types of toxic insanity are due to the actual intake of a poisonous
substance. This is sufficiently evident in cases which are associated
with Alcoholism. There is also evidence that in a considerable
number of cases toxic conditions result from perversion of metabolic
processes, or, again, are associated with ‘deficiency’ states (pp.
302-8). This is a very hopeful finding, since by removing the toxic
cause, or by remedying the deficiency, relief may be possible.

Much less hopeful is the outlook with those forms of insanity,
especially common in the adolescent, which are of the nature of a
perversion of development. Such is the large group known as ‘Dementia
praecox’. These cases almost invariably originate from a mentally
unsatisfactory stock. This is less so with the Epileptic insane, though
a considerable proportion of epileptics may be classed with those
who are born mentally defective and are liable to give rise to a bad
stock. Whatever view may be taken of the question of the artificial
limitation of human fertility, it is almost impossible to imagine that
the free breeding of these classes of defectives, epileptics and their
congeners, will continue unchecked in any civilized community.

The general care and treatment of the insane has improved out of
all knowledge during the last quarter of a century. It is probable
that there is now no class of sick person who is more skilfully and
considerately cared for.

From time to time an alarm is raised at the rapid increase in Insanity,
and it is a fact that the proportion of certified insane has been,
for some time, steadily rising. A considerable part of this rise is
certainly due to the greater willingness of the insane themselves to
enter an asylum, and of their friends to allow them to do so. Part of
the rise in numbers of the insane is due to their increased length of
life under improved treatment. It must be remembered that more than 90
per cent. of the insane in England and a similar percentage in other
countries are paupers, who are not readily discharged as they have no
means of support. Mild mental cases and the senile insane go now to
the improved asylums. Before they would have been kept at home or sent
to a rate-supported or a State infirmary. The general conclusion of
those best qualified to judge is that Insanity, if increasing at all,
is doing so only very slowly.




§ 16. _The New Movement in Psychology._

During the last half-century various new points of view have entered
into our conception of Mind and its disorders. The evolutionary view
of the origin of man, which was brought to wide notice by Charles
Darwin, not only in his _Origin of Species_ of 1859 but also in his
_Descent of Man_ of 1871 and his _Expression of the Emotions_ of 1872,
has given rise to new ideas as to the nature of many instincts and
emotions. These views have been co-ordinated with our knowledge of
lower types of man, both in his existing state and in his extinct and
fossil forms. Much that we call Insanity has been found to be related
to what is normal in other and less developed environments. The Mind,
breaking free from its habitual restraints, ‘reverts to a lower type’.
There is a constant though unconscious ‘conflict’ in the mind, which is
variously resolved.

Whole schools of Psychology have arisen in the discussion of the nature
and resolution of these conflicts. Sigmund Freud of Vienna (1856-)
takes the leading place among those who have dealt with this subject.
He holds these conflicts to be rooted in sex and has introduced
the method of _Psycho-analysis_, which lays great stress on the
subconscious or unconscious element in mental life. Largely under the
direction of C. G. Jung of Zürich (1875-), preventive and curative
measures, based on this view, have been introduced into medicine.
It has been established that painful experiences, lurking in the
unconscious mind, disturb the equilibrium of health. Such disturbance
is often of the nature of a struggle to repress into the unconscious
unpleasant memories which are tending to surge up into the conscious.
The psycho-analyst seeks to release the repressed experience into the
conscious. The recognition and consideration that follow a success in
this attempt is often far less painful than the repression. Persistent
unreasonable fears on the part of adults, but especially of children,
are frequently thus dispersed.

The importance of suitable environment to children has always been
recognized. But a new significance has been given to the mental
impressions received in infancy by cumulative evidence of harmful
results in the adult life of events in the early years of life that
are seemingly forgotten. This recognition of the enduring character of
mental impressions has led to a movement for the better instruction of
mothers, and has thus been a factor in the remarkable development, in
recent years, of work for infant welfare.

It is recognized, moreover, that certain instincts--such, for
example, as the self-regarding instinct and the sex instinct--must
have expression. Mere repression of such instincts is always harmful,
but they are susceptible of a process of transformation, technically
known as _sublimation_, to an almost indefinite extent. Thus the
self-regarding impulse need by no means lead to the inconvenience and
discomfort of others, but, rightly guided, may develop into a sense
of personal responsibility for the welfare of others. So, too, sex
instinct is but one aspect of that creative vital activity on which
depends the continuance not merely of the human race but also of the
culture that the race has built up. The sex instinct is thus habitually
sublimed into other creative channels, and there are many altars,
beside those of Venus, at which young men and women may kindle their
essential fires.


§ 17. _The Revolution in Nursing._

During the Middle Ages, and in Catholic countries after the
Reformation, attendance on the sick in Hospitals and elsewhere was the
task of religious sisterhoods. In Protestant countries the absence of
these sisterhoods necessitated the employment of women specially for
the purpose. The task was not an attractive one, nor did any social
distinction attach to it. The profession of nurse became despised
and was followed, for the most part, by a low and illiterate type of
woman, though midwives were sometimes better educated and of a higher
class (p. 180). The great philanthropists of the eighteenth century
(pp. 171-72) could do little to improve the nursing profession.
The conditions of employment formed the root of the evil. The vast
improvement that has resulted in health and happiness to our whole
population from the improvement in the character and training of nurses
is probably seldom realized, even by medical men. Yet it may reasonably
be doubted whether all modern medical and surgical advances put
together--apart from Preventive Medicine and Infant Hygiene--have saved
as many lives as the Reform of Nursing.

The reader may gain some insight into the life of a nurse from the
conditions that prevailed until beyond the middle of the nineteenth
century at a very good and well-managed English provincial hospital,
the Radcliffe Infirmary at Oxford. The salary of a nurse was £5 a
year. There was no distinction between a nurse and a domestic servant.
One nurse only was the allowance for a ward of seventeen patients. A
nurse’s day began at 6 a.m. The wards were cleaned till 7, when a bell
was rung and each nurse had to bring down her ashes and sift them under
the direction of the porter, who then gave her coals for the day. She
took breakfast with the patients, who helped her, so far as they were
able, with the ward work. At 2 p.m. she went to the servants’ hall,
where she had her dinner in company with the servants on daily hire.
During the dinner the ward was left in charge of a patient. After
dinner she took away a plate of meat and vegetables for her supper. For
the night there was normally only one nurse for the whole hospital of
about 100 beds. There were no regular holidays, and the nurse was never
allowed to leave the hospital before 6 p.m. The practice of nurses
receiving gratuities from patients continued till 1870 and even beyond.
Those patients who wished to secure a nurse’s early attention for their
dressings gave tips, those who did not frequently had to wait.

What sort of woman could such a system produce? That some nurses at
least were kind and skilful, even under such conditions, is a fact, and
is pleasing evidence of the natural goodness and wisdom that reside in
the human heart. Many, however, can have been no better than Sairey
Gamp and Betsy Prig.

The first important reform in Protestant countries began in Germany,
through the influence of Elizabeth Fry (p. 171). In 1822 Theodor
Fliedner (1800-64), the young pastor of the church at Kaiserswerth, a
little town on the Rhine near Düsseldorf, visited England and was much
impressed by Elizabeth’s teaching and example. Returning to his charge,
he devoted himself to the spiritual and physical care of jail-birds. In
1833 he and his devoted wife Frederica (1800-42) opened a refuge for
discharged female convicts. From them the couple turned their attention
to the sick poor. The conception of an organized body of specially
trained women crossed their minds. In 1836 they opened a small hospital.

At this hospital six young women of the most spotless character were
induced to serve as ‘deaconesses’. It was their duty to perform all
the tasks of the hospital in rotation. The physicians who attended the
hospital gave them instruction. The Kaiserswerth idea rapidly spread
and the ‘Kaiserswerth Deaconesses’ became and remain an important
order, which is still occupied in good works in many parts of the
world. The conception of the order is different from that of most
religious orders in that the members make no attempt to withdraw from
the world, and marriage is not forbidden to them. Moreover, the duties
of the Kaiserswerth deaconesses are rather different from and more
varied than those of a sick-nurse. They include teaching, both secular
and religious, nursing, household duties, management of children and
convalescents. In 1865 a preparatory school for probationers was opened.

In England Anglican orders of a somewhat similar character were formed
in the forties and fifties. In 1850 and 1851 Florence Nightingale
(1820-1910), who was a lady of good social rank, visited Kaiserswerth,
and went through a regular training there. She was profoundly impressed
by the extremely high character of the deaconesses, most of whom were
only peasant women. The next three years she spent in writing and in
examining hospitals in her own country.

Florence Nightingale’s opportunity came with the outbreak of
the Crimean War in 1854, and the rapid breakdown of the medical
services, which contained no women nurses. The French had a number
of ‘religieuses’ to nurse their sick, and a feeling of shame arose
in England at the neglect and mismanagement of the British sick and
wounded. The Secretary of State for War asked Florence Nightingale to
go to the Crimea to organize a nursing service. She left at once with
thirty-eight nurses whom she selected personally. Ten of these were
Roman Catholic sisters and all the others had had nursing experience.
From that event dates the Revolution in Nursing. Florence Nightingale
performed marvels under conditions of great difficulty (Fig. 128) and
in the face of determined opposition. She returned home in 1856 a
national heroine. She had no difficulty in establishing a school and
home for nurses at St. Thomas’s Hospital in London in 1860. The example
was followed by the other London hospitals.

Florence Nightingale was a woman of the most powerful will and an
admirable organizer and administrator. Her system of nursing contained
many new features, not quite all of which have stood the test of time.
That nursing rapidly and steadily improved from the moment she was in
authority cannot at all be doubted. Looking back, it is apparent that
the immediate success of her methods was due to two main factors. First
was her capacity to secure women of high character and good social
position to accept positions of responsibility. Second was her removal
of the control of the nursing staff entirely from the hands of men into
those of women. Her influence soon passed across the Atlantic, and she
was associated with the United States Sanitary Commission and the women
who took charge of army nursing during the American Civil War.

While Florence Nightingale was reforming Nursing, her contemporary,
Mary Carpenter (1807-77), was applying herself to the kindred task
of looking after neglected children, establishing Reformatory and
Industrial Schools and improving the position of Indian women. She
obtained a large measure of public support and exercised considerable
influence in America, which she visited in 1873. Many other
distinguished and devoted women worked on similar lines.

Among the indirect results of the activity of Florence Nightingale was
the establishment at Geneva in 1864 of the International Red Cross
Committee, the branches of which have done good service in many wars
and have been no less useful in peace.

Florence Nightingale opposed anything in the way of State registration
of nurses. Concentrating on a high ideal of competence and character
for the nurse, she failed to grasp some of the secondary effects of
her own scheme. A large nursing service is now a necessity in every
civilized country, as a result of her efforts and example. Having
regard to human imperfections, we can as little hope that every woman
who nurses will be a born nurse, devoted to her task, as that every
doctor or teacher will have a natural vocation for his work. In an
imperfect world mankind must protect itself against the incompetent and
the unfit. Registration is a way--doubtless an imperfect way--of doing
this. A Nurses’ Registration Act became law in England in 1919.

There have been many improvements in the details of the training of
nurses, incident on the changes in Medicine and Surgery during the last
half-century. Apart from these, the main improvements in Nursing have
been due firstly to an increased interest in the welfare and health
of the nurse herself, and secondly to the recognition that Nursing is
a profession for which, as for Medicine, some preliminary scientific
knowledge should precede professional training. Thus, the very long
hours of the nurse have of late been reduced, and in the best schools
instruction is now given to nurses in Anatomy, Physiology, Hygiene,
Bandaging, and Cookery, before the commencement of actual hospital work.

Further developments will probably be along the lines of State and
Municipal Nursing Services. Since Health is a public as well as a
private concern, the same must be true of the training and work of
nurses.




§ 18. _Some Modern Physiological Concepts of Clinical Import._

The vast activity in the sciences of Physiology and Pathology during
the last fifty years, and their repeated divisions into independent
sciences, each prosecuted by its own specialists, have yielded many
ideas which have been imported into the clinical practice of Medicine.
It is impossible to say which of these are of permanent value. All
previous ages have had to discard part of the practice and a large
proportion of the medical ideas that have been handed down to them, and
there is no reason to suppose that the age that follows us will differ
from those which have gone before us. Some ideas that have entered
Medicine from the physiological laboratory, pushed by interested
parties or seized on in despair by physicians at a loss for a line of
treatment, are already seen by men of experience and judgment to be no
permanent addition to our store. Other lines of physiological thought
are still under discussion by them.

There are, however, certain physiological conceptions which, apart from
their general implications in the economy of the body, have received
such wide application that their future, as an organic part of medical
practice, seems assured. Certain of these conceptions demand discussion
in even the most cursory survey of medical development.


(a) _Ductless Glands and Internal Secretions._

The nature and action of the various glands of the body has been a
classical physiological field. Malpighi (pp. 116-20) was the first to
investigate the structure of these organs, and he was followed by many
others. It became evident that many glands, such as the liver, the
salivary glands, and the tear glands, are provided with ducts or tubes,
which carry off the characteristic secretion of the glands. These
secretions can be examined with comparative ease--as happened early
with the secretion from the stomach, or ‘gastric juice’ (pp. 146-48),
and later with the secretion of other glands. There remain, however,
certain glands unprovided with ducts. The action of such ‘ductless
glands’ long remained a mystery. Of these the type is the ‘Thyroid
gland’. Much of our physiological knowledge of this organ, together
with the conception of its function as indispensable to normal life,
has come through Surgery.

It had long been known that certain symptoms were associated with
enlarged Thyroid gland or ‘Goitre’. Attempts to remove the organ
surgically were made after the introduction of antiseptic methods.
Goitre is particularly common in Switzerland, and it is not remarkable
that the technique of the very dangerous operation for the surgical
removal of goitres was first perfected by Swiss surgeons, among whom
Theodor Kocher (1841-1917) has taken the first place. The study of
cases that had had their Thyroid glands removed gave a clue to the
nature and action of the gland.

It was found that those surgically deprived of the Thyroid gland
develop abnormal slowness in movement and response. The temperature is
low, the pulse small, the muscles are torpid and sometimes rigid, and
there is a failure in ordinary fine muscular movements. The patient
shows a thickening and swelling of the skin and presents a dull and
very characteristic appearance. When the operation was performed on
one whose growth was not yet complete, development was checked. Such a
patient remains infantile or childish both in body and mind.

The conditions were recognized by Swiss surgeons in the seventies
as resembling those of a spontaneous disease to which the name
_Myxoedema_ was attached. Further the close relationship both of the
surgical and of the spontaneous condition to the state of idiocy known
as _Cretinism_ came gradually into view. In Switzerland, as in other
parts of Europe, stunted beings known as _Cretins_ had long been known.
These defectives are sometimes goitrous, sometimes without a Thyroid
gland, but their general appearance and condition is an exaggerated
version of what has been described for those with Thyroid glands
removed (Fig. 129).



The result of these observations was to direct the attention of
physiologists to the Thyroid gland. It was soon found that the symptoms
of Thyroid deprivation could be experimentally produced in animals.
Moreover, it was shown by Moritz Schiff of Berne (1823-1890), in
1884, that the results of the removal of the Thyroid might be avoided
if the animal were fed regularly on an extract of the glands. The
results were soon applied to man and have led to one of the greatest of
medical triumphs. By its means sufferers from myxoedema and cretinism
can be either cured or improved. A drivelling and idiotic cretinous
child, adequately treated with Thyroid, enters on a normal process
of development. The improvement is almost incredible, and the child
rapidly passes into a healthy and happy state, so that it is literally
true to say that his own parents would not recognize him (Fig. 130).
Further, the gland may be given in excessive doses, and a condition
produced that closely resembles a well-known pathological condition
known as ‘Exophthalmic Goitre’, which is similarly susceptible of
experimental investigation.

The facts here enumerated justify the deduction that the Thyroid
gland secretes something which is essential to normal well-being. The
organ has no duct, and the secretion is, therefore, never normally
thrown out of the body. The Thyroid is, in fact, an organ of what is
called ‘internal secretion’. Investigations on this secretion led to
the isolation of the active principle as a pure compound known as
_Thyroxin_ in 1916. The story of the Thyroid has recently (1926) been
rounded off by the preparation of Thyroxin synthetically. The synthetic
product has been given with effect in cases of Myxoedema.

The observations made on the Thyroid directed further attention to
other ductless organs of which a number have been shown to have their
own ‘internal secretions’. Furthermore, it has been demonstrated that,
among organs which throw out their products through a duct, there are
those which also send an internal secretion into the blood-stream.
Among these are the essential organs of sex, the testicle and ovary.
The effect of castration on the general physique is well known. It may
be compared with the effect of ‘spaying’ or the removal of the ovary.
This operation leads to an assumption by the female, in more or less
modified degree, of the secondary sexual characters of the male.

Peculiarly interesting for their practical results have been certain
investigations made of late years upon the organ known as the
‘Pancreas’. The Pancreas has a duct which opens into the Intestine
just below the Stomach. It has long been known that the secretion of
the Pancreas is related to the amount and fate of sugar in the blood.
The association of disease of the Pancreas with the symptom known as
‘Diabetes’, in which sugar appears in the urine, was also familiar.
Later it became apparent that it was not the Pancreas as a whole that
was related to the process but only certain isolated and peculiarly
formed nests of cells. It is now possible to administer extracts of
these cell-nests with very favorable results on the course of certain
types of Diabetes. The extract is now in wide use under the name of
_Insulin_.

Among the ductless glands that have been best investigated are the
so-called ‘suprarenal bodies’, which lie above the kidneys. As with
the thyroid gland, the attention of physiologists was directed to
these bodies as a result of clinical observations. These observations
date back to the middle of the nineteenth century. In the last years
of that century it was observed that an extract of the suprarenal
bodies, injected into the circulation, caused a rise in blood-pressure,
an effect opposite to that following the extirpation of the glands.
The administration of extract from suprarenal bodies has found wide
clinical application. Unlike the extract of thyroid, the effect of this
extract is very temporary. It is easily oxidized and rapidly disappears
from the blood. It belongs to the group of substances which are
known as _hormones_. The active element in a suprarenal extract, the
‘suprarenal hormone’, has been recently prepared by a synthetic process.

The nature of hormones has only come clearly into view of late years.
The word ‘hormone’ is formed from a Greek word meaning ‘to excite’.
The internal secretions have, in general, functions of considerable
physiological complexity, and act, for the most part, slowly and
continuously. The hormones are, however, exceptions to this rule. They
act rapidly and in an excitatory manner. These substances appear to be
of relatively simple chemical structure. They are easily oxidizable,
so that they rapidly disappear from the body. They act, in fact, as
‘chemical messengers’, producing a state of ‘chemical correlation’ of
the different parts of the body which is comparable to the better-known
and more widely recognized ‘nervous correlation’.

The hormones represent a very ancient and primitive physiological
mechanism. In organisms consisting of but one cell, in which there
are very few differentiated organs, the messages from one part of the
body to another are necessarily of a chemical or hormonic character.
In higher multi-cellular animals the intercommunication between
different parts of the body is maintained, for the most part, by a
specially developed nervous system. Certain necessary messages are,
however, still conveyed by chemical messengers. The development of
the conception of hormones has been especially the work of the London
physiologist E. H. Starling (1866-1927).

Internal secretions and especially hormones form part of the
increasingly complex picture of the working of the animal body. They
are not only of great physiological value, but have also entered
the department of practical therapeutics. They are, moreover, of
philosophical importance, since they yield us a conception of the body
in which every part is dependent on every other part, and the whole is
subject to a process of ‘integration’ or linkage into a unitary system.
We have glanced at the mechanism of chemical integration. We have now
to turn to the mechanism of nervous integration.


(b) _Nervous Integration._

If the simple reactions of animal bodies are tested, it will be found
that they clearly serve certain ends. Lightly touch the foot of a
sleeping child and it will withdraw it. Tickle the ear of a cat and
it will shake it. Exhibit savory food to a hungry man and at once
his digestive process will get to work--his mouth will ‘water’.
These instances might be multiplied a hundredfold. Such reflexes
are admirably adapted to their ends. Many of them will continue
in an animal in which the spinal cord is severed from the brain.
Nevertheless, in the higher animals, and especially in man, they are
controllable to a greater or less extent by the will. But to leave the
question at that would give a false idea of the extremely complex
integrative functions performed by the nervous system. Thus, the
spinal cord, which, to the naked eye, is a longitudinal and little
differentiated nervous mass, is, in fact, a collection of nerve-centers
which have historically, both in the individual and in the race, been
formed by the union of a series of separate segments. Each one of these
segments is dependent on the action of the next segment in a fashion
somewhat similar to that in which the actions of the cord itself are
dependent on the brain. Each of the sections governs certain functions
or movements of the body. There is thus a very complex process of
integration which runs right through the nervous system.

The investigation of the bodily functions of a chemical and physical
nature reveals that these activities are far more largely under
nervous control and discipline than was at one time conceived to be
possible. Thus, the main factor in the activity of any part is its
blood-supply, but the blood-supply is largely determined by the state
of contraction of the vessels of supply, which are in their turn under
nervous control. So it is with the state of nutrition of the muscles,
with the action of the sweat glands of the skin, with the mechanism of
childbirth, and with a thousand bodily states with which both physician
and biologist are concerned.

The investigation of nervous integration is especially associated
with the name of Sir Charles Sherrington of Oxford. As the outcome
of his work the picture formed of the nervous apparatus is that of a
machine in which some parts work spontaneously, automatically, and with
complete uniformity; others, though mainly automatic, are susceptible
of various degrees of alteration and adjustment; others need
intermittent or constant attention, and demand for their functioning
fresh supplies of energy at longer or shorter intervals; while,
finally, others have hardly yet taken a fixed form and are improvised
as occasion demands. Thus the nervous system is a system of systems of
every degree of independence.

These systems, each with a certain individuality of its own, date from
every stage of Evolution, the more ancient being, as a rule, the more
automatic and the less dependent on other systems. The most ancient,
the chemical messenger or ‘hormonic’ system (pp. 306-8), we share with
the lowest living things which consist of only one cell. Very recent
are the factors in the nervous system that are specially developed in
man as contrasted with the higher apes. Such are those associated with
the delicate co-ordination of sensory impressions and motor impulses
involved in such acts as speaking, reading, writing and the like. Each
of these systems, high or low, ancient or recent, has its own place
in the body. For many the exact position of the controlling center is
demonstrable and some of the lower systems can function without the aid
of any other systems save those which control their nutrition.

Among these nervous relations there is one which calls for special
mention on account of its great clinical importance. The state
of ‘shock’, the general nature of which is vaguely understood by
everybody, has been given a more exact physiological meaning of late
years, especially by the American surgeon G. W. Crile (1864-). It has
been found possible to localize ‘shock’ experimentally. If a section
of the spinal cord of an animal be cooled to a point just above
freezing, the part of the body below the cooled level passes into a
state of ‘shock’, that is to say, its reflexes no longer respond to
irritation in the normal fashion. This shock effect is due to the
removal of some influence exercised by the higher parts of the nervous
system. In the experiment the shock effect is induced by an external
agent, but there is an internal mechanism within the nervous system
itself, which can cause it under appropriate conditions.


(c) _Vitamins._

There are no current medical problems that are more discussed than
those of nutrition. It has long been recognized that articles of diet
may be classified according to their constitution into ‘proteins’,
‘carbohydrates’, and ‘fats’. If an animal is fed on a diet containing
these in correct proportion, but in a perfectly pure state, it will
become ill and ultimately die. The onset of illness and death will be
the more rapid if it be a young animal. This fact, observed as long
ago as 1880, was reinvestigated by F. Gowland Hopkins of Cambridge
in 1906, from whence dates our real knowledge of a very important
subject. He found that, in the case of rats, the addition of a very
small quantity of milk to this chemically pure diet would induce normal
growth. The milk must therefore contain some growth-promoting substance
or substances other than protein, fat, or carbohydrate. The result of
many similar experiments by a large number of observers has shown that
almost all fresh food contains such growth-promoting substances. They
have been named ‘vitamins’.

Several of these vitamins have been distinguished. None, however,
has been isolated, and we depend for our knowledge of them on our
investigation of their mode of action. One, known as _Vitamin A_,
is produced in the growing green parts of plants, and is especially
necessary for the promotion of growth. Vitamin A is abundant in
cod-liver oil. It has been shown that the necessity for Vitamin A
can to some extent be evaded if the animal is exposed to sunlight or
ultra-violet rays. Moreover, it has been shown that the absence of
Vitamin A or of some allied substance is associated with the disease
of the bones known as ‘Rickets’ or ‘Rachitis’. The history of this
disease (p. 181) is made intelligible by our knowledge of these facts.
Rickets can be shown to be most prevalent under precisely those social
conditions in which articles of diet containing Vitamin A are scarce
and the amount of sunlight is inadequate.

Our knowledge of this topic is in the process of active extension.
The question of the actual influence of sunlight and of the rays of
various wave-length which go to make it up is still too uncertain for
discussion here. There is a special aspect of this topic, however, to
which we may refer. It has been demonstrated that stable-fed cows, fed
not on fresh food but on oil-cake, yield milk of little antirachitic
power. It has, however, been shown that this milk becomes antirachitic
after exposure to ultra-violet light. Therefore, some antirachitic
substance is produced in the milk, as in the body, by the action of
ultra-violet light. Now recent research has shown that the antirachitic
elements are associated with a chemical substance known as _Cholestrol_
which is of the nature of a complex alcohol. Nevertheless chemically
pure Cholestrol has no antirachitic power, though it, too, acquires it
by exposure to ultra-violet light. By chemical means 99·9 per cent. of
rayed and antirachitic Cholestrol has been recovered as pure Cholestrol
without antirachitic power. Therefore the antirachitic power, that is
the vitamin factor, resides in the remaining one-tenth per cent. of
rayed Cholestrol. The further investigation of this fraction may be
expected to yield results of great importance both theoretically and
practically.

Another substance of the same order exists in the husks of rice. If
animals such as fowls be fed on a diet of rice deprived of its husks,
they develop a nervous affection. Now a somewhat similar nervous
affection known as ‘Beri-beri’ is known in the East among natives who
live on milled rice. The disease, whether in human beings or chickens,
may be cured or avoided by giving the husks of the rice separately.
The substance thus conveyed has been named _Vitamin B_. There is yet
another disease, Scurvy (p. 170), which occurs in those who have been
deprived of fresh food. _Vitamin C_, which cures this, is specially
found in the juices of oranges and lemons. Our knowledge of ‘deficiency
diseases’, of which Scurvy is one, is only just beginning. It may
well be that they are of wider occurrence than has been supposed, and
vitamins may be important curative and preventive agents.


§ 19. _Knowledge of the Eye and its Disorders._

From an early date the treatment of ailments of the eye has stood
somewhat apart from the rest of medical practice. Moreover, the
knowledge of the structure and functions of the parts of the eye has
not kept closely parallel with that of other departments of anatomy
and physiology.



The eye is a roughly spherical organ, enclosed in a tough capsule, the
_Sclerotic coat_ (Fig. 131). The transparent front of this capsule, the
_Cornea_, is the curved window through which we look upon our world.
There is a watery space, the _Anterior Chamber_, behind the Cornea,
at the back of which is situated the _Lens_, a horny transparent
structure. In front of the Lens is a ring-shaped pigmented muscle which
shuts out light from the Lens, except at the center, and gives the
characteristic color to the eye. This circular colored muscle is the
_Iris_, and the hole in its center is the _Pupil_. The pupil becomes
smaller or larger with contraction or expansion of the Iris. This
change is a reflex and unconscious act, depending on the amount of
light and also on the degree to which the eye is adjusted to examine
near objects.

The edge of the Lens of the eye is attached by the circular _Suspensory
Ligament_ to the circular _Ciliary Muscle_. The Ciliary Muscle, by
contracting or relaxing, alters the form of the Lens (Fig. 132).
This change in form of the Lens is part of the process of adjustment
to near or distant vision. Behind the Lens is the large _Posterior
Chamber_, containing a transparent gelatinous substance. At the back
of the posterior chamber is the sensitive area or _Retina_, which is
the essential organ of vision, and is backed by a pigmented coat, the
_Choroid_. The Retina is continuous with the _Optic Nerve_, along which
an artery enters the globe of the eye. At the point where this artery
pierces the Retina there is the so-called _Blind Spot_.

A ray of light penetrating the eye from the center of the Cornea
through the center of the Lens falls on or near a specially sensitive
area, the _Yellow Spot_, and images formed there are more distinctly
perceived than those formed elsewhere. When an object is examined
closely, the observer makes the attempt to bring the image of it on
to his Yellow Spot. Any injury to the Yellow Spot causes a great
diminution in clearness of vision. Man and his allies, the zoological
group known as the ‘Primates’, are the only mammals, except the cat
tribe, that possess a Yellow Spot. There can be little doubt that the
possession of this Yellow Spot has done much to raise the importance
of vision among the senses in the Primates. It has thus been a very
potent factor in the evolution and elevation of Man himself.

The eye is an optical instrument which, like other instruments,
performs its functions with something less than perfection. Most purely
optical errors of the eye can be remedied by spectacles. These aids to
vision are of very great importance, since, by the time middle life is
reached, few are fortunate enough to read in comfort without them. The
introduction of spectacles, therefore, enormously extended the active
intellectual life. Their social effects are incalculable.

The commoner optical errors may be classified under four heads.

First and commonest there is ‘old sight’. When a healthy eye adjusts
to near vision, the Ciliary Muscle contracts towards its attachment
at the junction of Conjunctiva and Sclerotic. This draws forward and
relaxes the Suspensory Ligament. The elasticity of the Lens, no longer
constrained by the Ligament, causes it to assume a more convex form.
This more convex form is appropriate to the correct focussing of a
near object on the Retina. At or about the age of forty-five the Lens
usually begins to lose its elastic power, and thus has difficulty in
adapting to near vision. The trouble is remedied by the use of convex
glasses for reading or other near work.

A second common error is the so-called ‘far sight’. In this form--save
in extreme cases--the eye is competent for distant objects, but those
that are near are not clearly seen. The incapacity for near vision is
due to a deformity--usually innate--of the eye. The eye is too short
along the axis _xy_ (Fig. 131). The resulting optical error can be
remedied by the use of convex spectacle lenses.



Thirdly, there is the so-called ‘near sight’. In this state near
objects can be clearly seen, but vision fails with those that are more
distant. Near sight is usually an acquired condition. The eye is too
long along the axis _xy_ (Fig 131). The resulting optical error can be
remedied by the use of concave spectacle lenses.

Fourthly, there is ‘irregular sight,’ known as ‘astigmatism’. In
extreme cases of this condition no perfectly clear image can be
formed of any object, whatever its distance. It is in some measure
both congenital and acquired, and is due to an irregular deformation
of the optical apparatus of the eye. The remedy for astigmatism is a
compensatory deformation of the spectacle lens, which may need, in
other respects, to accord to the convex or concave form, according as
the deformation of the eye is of the far-sighted or near-sighted type.

Historically optical errors of the eye were relieved by spectacles
before the nature of the defects was understood. The first suggestion
of the use of convex lenses as an aid to old sight was made by Roger
Bacon (1214-94) in the thirteenth century. Spectacles with convex
lenses for old or for far sight first came into use about 1300. By the
fifteenth century they were widely known. It may well be that their
adoption, by prolonging reading life, had an important effect upon
that process of extension of knowledge that we dub the ‘Revival of
Learning’. Concave lenses for the relief of near sight came in towards
the end of the fifteenth century, but were not widely used till the
eighteenth century. Astigmatic lenses were not contrived till well into
the nineteenth century.

In 1874 S. Weir Mitchell (1830-1914), a very able American physician,
showed that the eye strain resulting from astigmatism was associated
with many nervous conditions. Weir Mitchell’s name is familiarly
associated with a line of treatment of these conditions. Since his
discovery it has been the practice to examine for optical error all
sufferers with headache and other neurotic symptoms.

For long there was no means of estimating the degree of error, whether
of old sight, far sight, or near sight, save by trial on the part of
the patient himself. Spectacles were a common object of the hawker’s
trays, and from them the sufferer selected the specimen that suited him
best. The first essential improvement in this state of affairs was an
elucidation of the mode of action of lenses. The paths of light rays in
their passage through a lens were first correctly determined at the
beginning of the seventeenth century by the astronomer Johannes Kepler
(1571-1630). Knowledge of optics advanced during the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries, but the optical errors of the living eye were not
accurately estimated until the time of the great Dutch ophthalmologist
Frans Cornelis Donders (1818-89). The system of prescribing and fitting
spectacles that is now in vogue dates from the publication of his
work, _The Anomalies of Refraction and Accommodation_, in 1864. Hardly
less important was the invention of the ophthalmoscope by Hermann von
Helmholtz (p. 213). Very important also was the introduction of ‘test
types’ for examining errors of vision by the Dutch ophthalmologist
Hermann Snellen (1834-1904).

One of the most remarkable minds that has ever applied itself to
medical problems was that of the Quaker physician Thomas Young
(1773-1829). He was a man of immense learning, and is remembered
for having been the first to decipher Egyptian hieroglyphics. Young
explained the power of the eye to ‘accommodate’ for near vision. This
faculty of ‘accommodation’ was, he showed, due to changes in the
curvature of the crystalline lens (Fig. 132). In his memoir _On the
Mechanism of the Eye_ (1801), Young gave the first scientific account
of Astigmatism. His theory of color vision and his doctrine that light
is due to waves in the ether are still important. His ‘wave theory’
of light completely replaced the old view, the so-called ‘emission
theory,’ that light is due to something material which goes forth from
the luminous object. While we are referring to Young we may remind
the reader that his work on ‘Energy’ lies at the back of all modern
Physics, in the history of which he takes an extremely important place.

The operative treatment of the eye is of great antiquity. The most
important operative procedure is that for ‘cataract,’ a condition
caused by an opacity of the lens. ‘Couching’ for cataract, that is
depressing the opaque lens, was practised by Alexandrian surgeons
in the third century B.C. It is described by Celsus (p. 43) in the
first and mentioned by Galen (p. 50) in the second Christian century.
Contemporary with these authors are descriptions of the actual
extraction of the lens affected with cataract.

In Imperial Roman times there were surgeons who devoted themselves
exclusively to cataract operations. These were practised during the
Middle Ages by the Arabs and to a less extent by the Westerns. For the
most part the operations were performed by wandering quacks, who were,
however, often very skilful. In the sixteenth century operations on the
eye began to pass into the hands of recognized medical practitioners.
The advances in the knowledge of the anatomy and physiology of the eye
in the eighteenth century enabled the French surgeon Jacques Daviel
(1696-1762) to explain the real nature of cataract, which is usually
nothing but a senile change in the lens of the eye. His knowledge made
it possible for him greatly to improve the operation for extraction, so
that, over a large range of cases, he had only 11 per cent. of failures.

The modern era of ophthalmic surgery was ushered in by Donders (p.
319), von Helmholtz (pp. 213 and 319), and Albrecht von Graefe
(1828-70). The last was a professor at Berlin who greatly improved the
operation for cataract and introduced or improved many other important
operations on the eye. He was one of the first to make important
clinical observations with the ophthalmoscope, and he showed how the
instrument may be made to yield information not only of the condition
of the eye itself, but also of the brain and of its membranes, an
application which has become of the greatest value in later medical
developments. Though he died before the most important work of Pasteur
and Lister had become generally accepted, von Graefe was yet practising
a system of surgery which was not far from aseptic.

As with most departments of Medicine, so also with Ophthalmology,
the most significant advances during the last generation have been
in the direction of prevention rather than cure. Prominent among
these measures are, firstly, school inspection with the consequent
early detection and isolation of infectious cases of conjunctivitis;
secondly, maternity welfare accompanied by prompt notification and
treatment of the very dangerous and sight-destroying ‘Ophthalmia of the
New-born’; thirdly, improved light regulation in factories and schools;
and, fourthly, adequate provision of spectacles for school children
with errors of vision.

The recognition of the infectious character of the very chronic
and sight-destroying disease known as _Trachoma_, or ‘Granular
Conjunctivitis,’ has been of great importance for the Public Health.
The disease is common in the near East and in Eastern Europe and by no
means rare in slum quarters in the West. A rigid system of inspection
of immigrants, together with quarantine combined with treatment, has
done much to diminish its ravages in the United States.


§ 20. _Investigation of the Nature and Action of Drugs._


(a) _Entry of Vegetable Drugs into the Pharmacopoeia._

An examination of the list of drugs that are in use at the present
day--apart from those which have been introduced by the scientific
movement of the last generation--yields some surprising results. Some
thirty per cent. of the crude vegetable drugs in the modern official
Pharmacopoeia were known in remote antiquity. The Egyptian medical
papyri mention, among others, Aloes, Caraway, Castor Oil, Coriander,
Dill, Fennel, Juniper, Mint, Myrrh, and Turpentine. Among Egyptian
mineral remedies still in use are salts of copper and of lead. Assyrian
medical tablets refer to most of the Egyptian drugs as well as to a
number of others, among which are Almond Oil, Aniseed, Galbanum, and
Liquorice. Among Assyrian mineral remedies that are used by us to this
day are Alum and Bitumen. Early Indian medicine had a very copious
pharmacopoeia. _Cannabis indica_, known as ‘Hashish’ or ‘Indian hemp’,
Cardamoms, _Cassia fistula_, _Datura stramonium_, and _Nux vomica_ are
among the valuable Indian herbs now in use in scientific medicine,
while Mercury preparations were perhaps ultimately of Indian origin.

The medical herb lore of the Greeks comes to us chiefly from
Dioscorides (p. 43), who mentions about five hundred plants. A large
number of these are still in our own Pharmacopoeia. Among these,
besides those of Egyptian, Assyrian, and Indian origin, are Ammoniacum,
Belladonna, Camomile, Catechu, Cinnamon, Colchicum, Colocynth, Crocus,
Galls, Gentian, Ginger, Hyoscyamus, Lavender, Linseed, Male Fern,
Mallow, Marjoram, Mustard, Poppy, Rhubarb, Sesame, Stavesacre, Storax,
Terebinth, Tragacanth, and Wormwood. About thirty-seven per cent. of
our Pharmacopoeia was known to the later Greeks. From them the Arabs
derived, adding, however, enormously to their drug-lists, so that we
may say that about fifty per cent. of our drugs were in use by the
Arabic-speaking physicians of the Middle Ages. With the discovery of
America further important additions were made. Of these we have already
discussed the introduction of Cinchona, Ipecacuanha, and Tobacco (p.
95). Few important additions were made in the eighteenth century,
though among them was Digitalis (p. 328).


(b) _Active Principles._

One of the things that separate the practice of Medicine of our time
from that of previous ages is our power to give drugs in ‘pure’ form.
This means not only that we can secure drugs without adulteration, but
also that the active substances in drugs can be chemically isolated
and given without admixture. Most drugs used in Medicine are, in fact,
of vegetable origin. The possibility of giving them in chemically pure
form depends upon the discovery, early in the nineteenth century, that
plants owe their poisonous and remedial properties to small quantities
of _Active Principles_, which are susceptible of chemical extraction
and isolation. Thus the science that deals with the action and nature
of drugs, _Pharmacology_, really took its rise about a hundred years
ago, though many had experimented with drugs at an earlier date.

Further progress in the same direction has been made by the so-called
‘synthetic’ preparation of drugs. Certain substances of vegetable
origin do not readily yield their active principles and to extract them
very complex chemical processes may be involved. There are special
obstacles to the complete purification of other drugs, even when they
have been obtained in a relatively pure state. These difficulties can
sometimes be surmounted by the preparation of the drug from inorganic
materials. This synthetic process of preparation is now possible for
many substances that are of medical application. Furthermore, when
a drug can be thus synthetically prepared, it is often possible to
try chemical variants upon it, and thus to obtain a more effective
preparation.

In former times a vast number of drugs were habitually employed
by physicians, and they were often given in very complicated
prescriptions. ‘Polypharmacy’, the giving of many drugs, is a vice
from which Medicine has now in large part freed itself. The number of
drugs given by scientific physicians is far fewer that it was. For
this there are several reasons. Firstly, many drugs were found useless
for the purpose for which they were administered, and were at times
even dangerous. Secondly, since attention has been drawn to the active
principles of drugs rather than to the crude natural drugs, it has been
seen that, in fact, many of the drugs that were being given were merely
duplicates one of another, and that often the administration of the
active principle itself was more effective and more reliable than that
of the source from which it was obtained.

What then is the nature of the drugs now being administered by
scientific physicians? They fall into a number of classes. The nature
and action of some of these is so simple that no prolonged discussion
of them is necessary. There are, for instance, the inorganic acids
and alkalis, the primary action of which, when taken internally,
can be determined by a series of experiments on gastric juice in a
test-tube kept at body temperature. Again, there are soluble inorganic
salts, which are absorbed unchanged from the alimentary canal. These
have the effect of increasing secretions. Their purgative effect is
well known, though the physiological details of their action are not
yet clear. There are yet other substances, such as metallic Mercury
in ‘grey powder’ or Bismuth, which act mechanically, even when
administered internally. Over and above these simpler substances, and
in addition to the traditional vegetable substances which have been in
use as medicines for centuries, there are others which have only been
accessible during the last few generations. We have already discussed
under separate headings the derivatives from animal glands, such as
of the Thyroid (p. 305), of the Adrenals (p. 307), or of the Pancreas
(p. 306), as well as the bacterial Vaccines (p. 261) and Antitoxins
(p. 267). We now turn to pure chemical substances of vegetable origin.
Of these mention may be made especially of the groups known as the
_Alkaloids_ and the _Glucosides_.


(c) _The Alkaloids._

By ‘Alkaloid’ is understood a nitrogenous substance, usually of
vegetable origin, which forms salts with acids. The alkaloids are
mainly obtained from the dicotyledonous plants. Generally they occur
in nature in combination with plant acids such as citric or tartaric
acid. The alkaloid group contains some of the most important drugs that
we possess. Among them are Morphine, Strychnine, Cocaine, Atropine, and
Quinine.

The investigation of the alkaloids began with the nineteenth century.
Morphine was isolated from Opium by the Parisian apothecary Charles
Derosne (1780-1846) in 1803. He failed, however, to recognize its
chemical affinities, which were first grasped by the German apothecary
Adolf Sertürner (1783-1841). Their work, however, attracted but
little notice until attention was drawn to it by the great French
chemist Joseph Gay-Lussac (1778-1850), in 1817. The result was the
concentration of much scientific ability on the alkaloids. Prominent
among the early investigators were the French pharmacologists Pierre
Joseph Pelletier (1788-1842) and Joseph Caventou (1795-1878). Between
1818 and 1820 they isolated from Cinchona (p. 95) certain alkaloids
allied to Quinine, from Nux vomica the alkaloid Strychnine and certain
of its allies, and from Coffee the alkaloid Caffeine. Pelletier
in conjunction with the distinguished chemist Jean-Baptiste Dumas
(1800-84) followed this by a quantitative examination of a number of
alkaloids in 1823. The first alkaloid to be used as such in medicine
was Strychnine. It was introduced in 1821 by the French physiologist
François Magendie (1783-1855), the teacher of Claude Bernard.

In the thirties and forties of the nineteenth century Liebig, who had
developed his doctrine of radicles (p. 206), attempted to determine
the formula of alkaloids. He was followed by Wöhler (p. 206). Since
then an immense amount of work has been done in investigating the
chemical nature and physiological action of alkaloids. The general
result has been to reveal the fact that each alkaloid-yielding plant
contains not one but a number of alkaloids. Those from the same plant
often have similar but not identical action upon the animal body. The
differences in physiological action of allied alkaloids have occupied
much of the attention of pharmacologists. The accurate knowledge of
these differences has made possible a far greater finesse in the
administration of alkaloid drugs than was previously possible. Some
alkaloids can be prepared synthetically, but the process is mostly of
theoretical rather than practical importance.


(d) _The Glucosides._

The Glucosides are an ill-defined group which have in common the
property of yielding a sugar-like substance--usually glucose itself--as
a result of certain chemical processes. They are mostly of vegetable
origin and the history of their investigation has been parallel with
that of the alkaloids. The first glucoside to be isolated was Salicin,
which was obtained from willows in 1819. It is the active principle of
the very ancient remedy for rheumatism, ‘Oil of Wintergreen’. Salicylic
acid was introduced into Internal Medicine in 1873 and its derivative,
Aspirin, in 1899. Both drugs are of great importance, and many other
derivatives of Salicin are in use. Salicin and its derivatives can
be prepared synthetically, and the synthetic products are in use in
Medicine.

Of all the glucoside-yielding plants, perhaps medically the most
important is the Foxglove, _Digitalis purpurea_. The use of the plant
was known to some of the medieval herbalists, and is, moreover,
recommended in the German and English printed herbals of the sixteenth
and seventeenth centuries. Foxglove is mentioned as a folk remedy
in George Eliot’s _Silas Marner_, the story of which refers to a
period round about 1750 before the Industrial Revolution, ‘when the
spinning-wheels still hummed busily in the farm-houses’ (Fig. 89). It
was introduced into scientific Medicine in 1785 by William Withering
(1741-99) of Birmingham in his _Account of the Foxglove_, which gives
details of numerous cases treated with it.

Digitalis long resisted the attempts to extract an active principle,
but since the seventies it has yielded to investigators a whole series
of glucosides. Digitalis and its derivatives have become of much
importance, especially in the treatment of cardiac conditions. Despite
the success in obtaining glucosides from the Foxglove, the extract of
the plant itself continues in wide use.


(e) _The Study of Pharmacology._

Since the middle of the nineteenth century the investigation of the
physiological action of drugs has been mainly in German hands. The
most prominent exponents of the method have been Karl Binz (1832-1912)
and Oswald Schmiedeberg (1834-1921), both professors at Dorpat, where
there has been a pharmacological laboratory since 1849. The first
pharmacological laboratory in America, that at Ann Arbor established in
1893, and the first in England, that at University College, London,
established in 1905, were successively occupied by A. R. Cushny
(1866-1926). The work of these and of other pharmacologists has not
tended to increase but to reduce the number of drugs. Nevertheless,
some new drugs of great importance have been introduced by them. Of
these, among the more valuable is Amyl nitrite, the inhalation of which
was first recommended by T. Lauder Brunton (1844-1916) as early as 1867
as a remedy in certain cases of sudden heart seizure.

Improvements have been made not only in the drugs themselves but
also in modes of administration. The ancient methods of inunction
and inhalation, as well as other older methods, have been greatly
elaborated in modern times, and are now of wider application than
they were. No advance of this order compares in importance with the
introduction of the Hypodermic Syringe by the ingenious French surgeon
Charles Gabriel Pravaz (1791-1853). By means of this instrument various
drugs can be injected directly into the subcutaneous tissues or into
the veins. This mode of administration is more accurate and under
better control than any other, and the action of the drug so injected
is swifter and more sure.


(f) _Chemotherapy._

During the twentieth century the outlook on drug treatment has
been modified by the success obtained in the _specific_ treatment
of certain diseases, that is to say, treatment by remedies which
strike at a particular disease and no other. Until quite recently
scientific Medicine recognized very few specific remedies. It had been
ascertained that Cinchona owes its value in Malaria to the alkaloid
Quinine (p. 326), which acts as a specific exterminator of the malaria
parasites, and not simply as a remedy for fever in general. It had
also been ascertained that Ipecacuanha owes its value in tropical
Dysentery to the alkaloid Emetine, which acts similarly as a specific
exterminator of the protozoal organisms which are the infective agents.
Quinine and its allied alkaloids and Emetine and its allied alkaloids
were practically the only specifics the value of which had been
scientifically proved, except Mercury for Syphilis.

About the beginning of the twentieth century arose the new
‘Chemotherapeutic’ movement as it came to be called. This movement was
initiated by the studies of natural Antibodies (p. 262) by Paul Ehrlich
of Frankfurt (1854-1915). Antibodies are strongly antagonistic to the
parasitic organism the toxin of which has elicited them, but, on the
other hand, they are quite harmless to the animal body in which they
reside. Here are ideal remedies provided by Nature herself. Ehrlich
compared them to magic bullets, constrained by a charm to fly straight
at their objective and to injure no other. No such perfect artificial
drugs have yet been produced. The problem of Chemotherapy is rather how
to poison the parasite as much as possible while poisoning the host as
little as possible.

When Ehrlich began the study of Chemotherapy observers had long known
that certain aniline dyes have a special affinity for certain cells
or organisms. Indeed the affinity of certain of the dyes for certain
bacteria had made possible the work of Koch on Tuberculosis and on
other diseases. As far back as the seventies and eighties much
work had been done on the subject, and the action of these dyes had
interested a large variety of investigators. Ehrlich’s first results
were on a protozoal parasite, which infests dogs. By injecting small
doses of a certain aniline dye into the veins of the infected animal
it was found possible to destroy the parasites while doing very little
injury to the dog.



At this point Ehrlich turned aside from the aniline dyes to study
the effects of much more toxic substances. He selected the compounds
of arsenic for the purpose. After prolonged research, he obtained an
arsenical derivative which proved very toxic to parasitic protozoa and
little toxic to their animal hosts. When a vast number of experiments
had been made, this substance was tried in 1910 in cases of human
Syphilis. This disease had been shown by Fritz Schaudinn (1871-1906)
in 1905 to be due to a protozoal parasite, the _Spirochaeta pallida_
(Fig. 133). The results obtained by the new remedy were very
satisfactory and a valuable specific was thus added to the medical
armory. The drug became widely known as 606, since this is its number
in the series of the arsenic derivatives with which Ehrlich had
experimented. In the meantime others had been at work along lines
suggested by the aniline experiments. Their investigations led in 1920
to the discovery of a specific against the deadly _Sleeping Sickness_
or _Negro Lethargy_. This drug is known as _Bayer 205_ from the firm
that prepared it and the number in the series of substances that were
tested.

Since the first preparation of 606 and 205 some interesting facts have
emerged concerning their action as well as the action of Quinine,
Emetine, and other specific remedies. It has been found that the
toxicity of these substances to the parasites against which they are
aimed is much greater when the parasites are within the body than when
the drugs are applied to the organisms outside the body. In other
words, the drugs do something to the body, or the body does something
to the drugs, that is inimical to the parasite. The nature of that
something is still under discussion. In the case of Quinine it seems
that the Quinine so affects the red blood corpuscles that the malarial
parasites cannot enter them and so cannot go through their sexual
cycle (Fig. 123). Thus the Quinine does not act as a direct poison
but attacks the parasite in a much more subtle manner. In the case
of other parasites the action of the specifics is more difficult to
understand. It should be pointed out, however, that the chief victories
of Chemotherapy have been in dealing with the protozoal rather
than the bacterial diseases. A main task of future Medicine will be
the discovery of means of eliciting antibodies against the various
bacterial infections. For this there is more immediate hope from the
use of remedies of vital origin than from those synthetically produced.


§ 21. _Interpretation of Collective Medical Data._

The drawing of a deduction of scientific value from experience is
by no means a simple process. In many sciences the investigator has
the power to control experience; in other words he can _experiment_.
But even the interpretation of experiment needs special precautions.
The physical experimenter must, for instance, make sure that he has
but one ‘variable’. Thus, if examining the effects of pressure on
a gas, he must see that in raising or lowering pressure he is not
altering temperature, or if recording the effects of temperature he
must satisfy himself that he is eliminating those of pressure. In
experiments upon living things the limitation of the field of action to
one simple factor is often--perhaps always--impossible. The biological
investigator is therefore accustomed to accompany his experiment with
‘controls.’ Thus, if he wishes to ascertain the effect on the growth
of animals of feeding with milk that has been boiled, he must feed one
series of animals on unboiled milk while he is experimenting with a
series fed with the boiled milk. He must take steps to ensure that the
two series are similar as regards age, strength, size, &c., and that
the conditions under which they live are identical, except as regards
the one factor the results of which he seeks to ascertain.

When the observer is dealing with human material, it is very seldom
that he can either restrict the number of variables to one or secure an
adequate series of controls. Physicians are habitually in a position in
which action of some kind is demanded. They cannot await the conclusion
of laboratory researches, which may extend over years, for the patient
must be relieved at once or die. Being often unable to use those most
reliable instruments of science, experiment or observation under
control conditions, physicians have come to rely on what is called ‘a
general experience of disease’.

One of the commonest fallacies of such general experience is assignment
of causative relationship between two conditions, simply on the ground
that they frequently occur in association. Thus it is a fact--and one
to which attention has been drawn by medical observers--that rheumatic
affections and red-headedness are often found together. But both
conditions are common and it has not been satisfactorily demonstrated
that the association of the two is any commoner than their frequency
in the population at large would render probable. Such general
experience is therefore very fallible and is incapable of scientific
expression, though it is often very valuable and sometimes indeed
entirely indispensable. To give such experience scientific expression,
to place it in terms of the ‘primary qualities’ of the founders of
modern Science (pp. 106-7), it is necessary to put it into statistical
form. Statistical statement thus becomes of the highest importance
for medical progress. Medical statistics, when prepared from proper
material and drawn up with the requisite skill, are at once the most
exact and the most generalized expression of medical experience.



Statistical statements, however, vary greatly in their value and ease
of interpretation. The simplest statistical statements with which the
medical man has to deal are perhaps those which relate to surgical
operations. The categories in which the patient may be placed are here
limited; he may die, recover, improve, or get worse. If the operation
is a quite simple one, and if the surgeon is perfectly honest, and
also--which is rarer--quite unbiased, a small body of statistics
may carry immediate conviction as to the value of an operation.
Thus, Lister’s first results with amputation, as obtained under
his antiseptic conditions, at once satisfy the mind, although the
conclusions are based on only forty cases (p. 240). No surgeon at once
both able and willing to appreciate these results would hesitate to
adopt the new method.

The operation of amputation is, however, in a statistical sense,
a particularly simple matter. The patient must either undergo the
operation or not, and the proportion of cases in which the necessity is
doubtful is very small. Further, he either recovers or dies--for the
operation could hardly be in itself unsuccessful, nor the surgeon in
doubt as to whether the patient had recovered or not. Many operations,
however, are not of this order. They may be performed for conditions as
to the exact nature of which the surgeon is uncertain, and for symptoms
which may be only partially relieved. Thus, the removal of the appendix
for Appendicitis may be most urgently necessary for the saving of life
in one case and may be a matter of convenience for the relief of more
or less indefinite symptoms in another. Further, what one surgeon calls
appendicitis another may not. One surgeon may have every appendix
that he removes submitted to skilled pathological examination before
he accepts the case as one of appendicitis and places it among his
statistics. Another may be quite content with naked-eye appearances of
the nature of which he alone is witness, judge, and reporter. It is,
therefore, clear that any collective statement as to the results of
such an operation must be cautiously scrutinized before conclusions of
the slightest scientific value can be drawn from them.



There is a common and rather foolish saying that ‘Statistics may be
made to prove anything’. This is true, but it is true only in the sense
that _evidence_ may be made to prove anything. The matter turns on the
questions, firstly whether the evidence is of a good or a bad order,
and secondly whether the investigator is in a good or bad position to
interpret the evidence. A statistical statement may be well or ill
founded and well or ill interpreted, but statistical statement is, in
fact, the only scientific method open to us for presenting long series
of data. The conclusions to be drawn from those data, though sometimes
evident and easily elicited, at other times demand specially skilled
and specially trained interpreters. Moreover, to be of value to others,
such interpreters must also be skilled in expression, so that the main
body of those who have no statistical training may be in a position to
understand the essential elements in their conclusions. In no medical
department is literary power of greater importance than in that which
deals with statistics. Thus has arisen the small but highly important
class of medical statisticians. The rise of medical statistics into a
vocation places the crown on Medicine _as a science_. It is not given
to many medical men to be proficient in this department. But the duty
lies on all medical men, and indeed on all citizens, to appreciate
the value of this study and to seek to appraise its simpler and more
established conclusions.

It is remarkable how frequently a straightforward statistical statement
may remove a false impression, even when the impression is based on
evidence not of a wholly unscientific character.





For example the increase in the incidence of deaths from Cancer has
often been emphasized. But Cancer is a disease of advancing life. The
age distribution of the death-rate from many forms of Cancer is closely
parallel to that of certain other forms of senile disease (Figs.
136 and 137). Now the age constitution of the population of most civilized
countries is altering in the sense that the proportion of the elderly
and aged is constantly increasing (Fig. 134), so that some increase in
the Cancer incidence must be expected. Moreover the appearance of some
increase in the incidence of Cancer is due to improved diagnosis. How
far there is a real increase, when these factors have been taken into
account, is still somewhat doubtful. It must always be borne in mind
that a relative decrease in the proportion of deaths from _any_ cause
must automatically increase the proportion of deaths from other causes.

Again, there is no doubt of the fall in the death-rate in England
and Wales from ‘Phthisis,’ or pulmonary tuberculosis, during the last
fifty or sixty years. There is also no doubt of the effect both of
bad housing and of urban conditions in inducing a susceptibility to
chest disease in general and to pulmonary tuberculosis in particular.
Further, there is no doubt that the rural population suffers less
from pulmonary tuberculosis than the town population. These matters
of common medical knowledge have naturally led to the conclusion that
the rise of the great towns has led to a great increase of pulmonary
tuberculosis, and that this increase has been remedied by the improved
housing and sanitary conditions of the last generation. A study of the
statistical evidence, however, negatives this view. The rise in the
proportion of deaths from pulmonary tuberculosis took place before the
Industrial Revolution. Moreover, the proportion began to fall long
before the campaign against tuberculosis could affect the issue. The
history of pulmonary tuberculosis may, in fact, be regarded as that of
an ‘epidemic’ outbreak, extending over about 100 years, of a disease
which has always been endemic and remains so now that the epidemic is
past.



These points are well brought out in the accompanying diagram (Fig.
138). The fall in the proportion of deaths from Phthisis expressed
there gives rise to further considerations. It might seem that the
statement that the proportion of those who died from phthisis was
diminishing left in itself no doubt that the disease was less prevalent
than formerly. This, however, is not the case. Phthisis is more liable
to affect those under forty-five years of age than those who are
older. Now the proportion of the population that is under forty-five
is steadily diminishing (Fig. 134). This is one of the results of the
steadily diminishing general death-rate (Fig. 96, p. 196). Therefore
the proportion of the more susceptible to the less susceptible is
diminishing. It might have been the case (though it is not) that the
ratio (more susceptibles)/(less susceptibles) was not only decreasing
but was actually decreasing more rapidly than the ratio (total
deaths)/(deaths from phthisis). Had this been so, the conclusion would
have been justifiable that the fall in the proportion of deaths from
the disease did not correspond to any decrease in its infectivity. In
fact, however, the prolonged high mortality from phthisis and its later
rate of fall do suggest the former prevalence of a more virulent type
of the disease over a long period, in other words something of the
nature of a prolonged epidemic.

This conclusion leads us to the conception of the nature of an
epidemic. To gain some conception of the ideas involved in that word,
we must glance back in history.

From the time of Hippocrates onward the subject of Epidemic outbursts
of disease has drawn the attention of physicians. A writer in the
_Hippocratic Collection_ thought he could perceive an association
of symptom-complexes with each other and with the weather. In the
great work _Epidemics_, to which the name of the Father of Medicine
is attached, such a view, known as that of ‘Epidemic Constitutions,’
is set forth. The view was revived by Sydenham in the seventeenth
century and has given rise to a vast literature extending to our own
time. In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries the attempts of the
investigators of vital statistics to place the leading events of life
in a form capable of exact analysis (pp. 166-68) focused attention
on the search for a mathematical expression for the rise and fall of
epidemic diseases.

The first successful attempt to describe epidemics along these lines
was made by William Farr (1807-1883), an official in the office of
the Registrar-General in London, and one of the greatest of all
epidemiological thinkers. His first publication on the subject was
in 1840, and had reference to the recent outbreak of small-pox, in
which more than 30,000 had died in England and Wales. It was his merit
to observe that the successive decreases in the number of cases in
successive equal periods during the decline of the epidemic correspond
to the successive increases in the number of cases during successive
equal periods of the rise of the epidemic. In other words, he observed
that the rise and decline of an epidemic tend to be mathematically
symmetrical.

Farr’s suggestion that epidemics are liable to follow the lines of
regular mathematical rules drew little attention at the time, but in a
later year it led to a most remarkable and striking prophecy. At the
end of 1865 Cattle-plague broke out in England. Week by week the number
of cases increased. In the fourth week of February 1866 the responsible
Minister, in a speech in Parliament, gave a very gloomy account of
the state of affairs, expressing the belief that the devastation
would be far beyond what had yet been encountered. Farr, however, had
been watching the returns, and had been applying his rule to them. He
thereupon made a public pronouncement of his belief that at an early
date the outbreak would reach its maximum and would then decline. The
outbreak did, in fact, very closely follow the course which he had
predicted by reasoned calculation. Farr even prophesied the number of
cases that would occur week by week. His prophecy was near the truth.

During the years that followed Farr’s prediction his views were applied
with success to a variety of epidemic conditions. The regular form of
the development of the epidemic was found to apply in certain outbreaks
of typhus, measles, and other conditions.

Farr’s law was more exactly expressed by him in 1868. It remained,
however, simply a mathematical law, a rule of which the underlying
cause was not apparent. It was soon observed that his law applied to
many but by no means to all epidemics. Moreover, it was perceived that
the actual figures which he gave for his epidemic of 1840 resembled
those of certain other epidemics in that they could be fitted with
greater or less exactness to a well-known mathematically described
curve, known as the ‘normal curve of error’. We need not discuss the
mathematical foundation of this curve, which is shown in two variants
in Fig. 139. For our immediate purpose it is enough to observe that it
rises gradually at first, but then more steeply, that the steepness
decreases after a while, and then the curve begins to decline again, as
it rose. We note that it is symmetrical.





When we are dealing with living beings or are dealing with things that
may indefinitely approximate to a mathematical rule, but never entirely
fit it. Especially when the living beings are also human beings, with
their infinitely complex relationships, various factors are present
which interfere with the exact application of mathematical findings.
Nevertheless, the theoretical form of the epidemic is an extremely
useful framework into which actual epidemics may often be fitted, with
greater or less exactness. In the accompanying figures (Figs. 140-141)
are adduced cases of greater exactness. There are, however, many cases
in which an ‘outbreak’ does not seem to fit the simple theoretical
curve at all. Examination of such curves has in some cases suggested
that we have not one epidemic or disease but two or more to deal with.
In some cases it has been possible to analyze the outbreak on the basis
of two or more theoretical curves, suggesting in fact two or more
outbreaks of similar but not identical causation (Fig. 142).



What can be the causative element which constrains the incidence of a
disease in a population to follow mathematical rules? An answer was
provided by John Brownlee (1868-1927), the late statistician to the
Medical Research Council of England. The leading fact about an Epidemic
is that it rises to a maximum, falls, and then dies out, and that the
curve representing the number of new cases in a series of equal and
consecutive periods of time throughout the Epidemic is symmetrical. In
practice the decline is usually a little slower than the rise. This
is sometimes, at least, due to better observation and record of the
later cases. Now why does an Epidemic die out? The possible reasons
may be reduced to three. Firstly, the end of an Epidemic may be due to
the exhaustion of susceptible persons in the population. That is to
say, all the survivors are immune, either being so by nature or having
become so by having contracted the disease and recovered. Secondly, it
is conceivable that the liability to the disease should be decreased,
not by rise in the proportion of immunes, but by externally acting
causes, as, for instance, by rise of seasonal temperature, which would
provide conditions under which the organism loses its infectivity.
Expressed in older language, this is to say that the ‘Epidemic
Constitution’ (p. 342) has changed. Thirdly, the infecting organisms
may, of their own inner nature, lose their infectivity. The second
factor may act in special cases, but may be disregarded except in those
cases. We are, therefore, left with the first and third.

Now it is possible to construct curves that would correspond to the
exhaustion of the supply of susceptible persons by continuous increase
of the proportion of those who become immune either by taking the
disease or by dying. These curves, however, have the character that
their descent is more rapid (and neither as rapid nor less rapid) than
their ascent. It is the merit of Brownlee to have suggested that the
actual curve of the Epidemic corresponds to a known though very little
understood biological phenomenon, namely change in the infectivity of
the invading organisms. The simplest expression of his discovery is
that the loss of infectivity of these organisms is approximately in the
ratio given by a geometrical progression. That is, if the infectivity
of the Epidemic be _m_, and at the end of a unit of time _mg_ (when _g_
is less than unity), at the end of a second unit of time it will be
_mg_^2, and at the end of the third _mg_^3, and so on. Assuming this
to be a fact, the course of Epidemics would follow the curve of normal
error (Fig. 139).

Of late years it has been possible to institute artificial epidemics in
a series of animals under control conditions. Such experiments must,
in the nature of the case, cover a large number of years, but they bid
fair to throw much light on the nature and progress of human epidemics.

These results seem to show, what was believed on other grounds, that
in the case of highly infective disease, to which, in any population,
there are many highly susceptible, isolation of declared cases has
little or no effect on the course of the Epidemic. Such diseases are
Scarlet Fever, Measles, Influenza, &c. Moreover, the experimental
epidemics seem to confirm the conclusions of Brownlee that in some
cases at least the course of the epidemic is determined by biological
changes within the parasitic beings that cause it.

Thus in the end our health, our lives, and indeed the continuance
of our civilization may well depend upon a factor which is outside
ourselves. For reasons which we know not, the pullulating billions
of living things which are around us, upon us, within us, take up a
virulence which before they had not, and after a time they lose that
virulence to become as they were before. The world is devastated by
an outbreak of Plague, of Cholera, of Influenza. But how and why
the organisms that carry these diseases should acquire a new and
more deadly infectivity lies among the secrets yet locked within the
living cell. Life--the life of the Cell, of the Bacterium, of Man
himself--remains among the _Arcana Naturae_. These are the secret
things that in their essence--which is Life--remain and will remain
behind the veil. From such cells we came, through such cells we shall
return. As to what is the force which starts these processes on their
way, we are as ignorant as children, and must remain so, in essence,
till we understand the nature of the processes of coming into being and
passing away. So Medicine must end where she began, quaking before the
Mystery of Life, a Mystery which could only be resolved if we could
express Mind in terms simpler than itself. If this could be done the
veil that is cast over all flesh would indeed be rent. But the author
of this work believes that the hope of this is vain and that we are
here in the presence of one of the ultimate things.




EPILOGUE


We have now traced various movements in Medicine throughout the ages
and have seen how all the sciences in turn have been made to bring
their tribute to the alleviation of suffering. We have seen especially
how the consideration of disease as a whole, and of the health of
peoples as a whole, has introduced a new view in the handling of
disease. Health is a public asset, and its promotion has now been
recognized as a public duty. There are undeniable disadvantages in
placing officers of the State in control of the personal liberties of
its citizens, but, on the whole, the advantages, in matters of health,
have outweighed the disadvantages. Only a professed pessimist or a
crotchety reactionary could deny the gains to humanity from the passage
of preventive measures from private into public hands.

There is another side of the picture which we have need also to
consider. The advances in Medicine and the advantages that have accrued
therefrom have been entirely the result of the application of the
rational method of observation and experiment. To control Nature we
must above all things understand Nature. Neither the conception of
Nature as the kind old nurse nor the conception of Nature ravening red
in tooth and claw will stand. Least of all can we tolerate the picture
of Nature as a bountiful mother. If we go to her asking something for
nothing, she (far from bountiful) will give us little but what we have
given her, and to him who but begs she gives no more than a beggar’s
portion. It is thus that she has served the magician and the wizard,
who think they can compel her to give them all things by their paltry
charms!

The amount of human labor and ingenuity that is now being thrown
into the investigation of Nature is almost incredible even to men
of science. Some conception of the enormous and unreadable bulk of
scientific literature may be gained by a glance at the _International
Catalogue of Scientific Literature_. This gives the _titles alone_
of original articles in the various departments of physical science.
These titles for the year 1914 alone occupied seventeen closely printed
volumes! The rate of publication has accelerated considerably since
then. There are now about 25,000 periodicals devoted to scientific
publications! There are very few departments of science which do not
have some bearing on Medicine. It is evident that no human mind can
possibly compass even a year’s output of this material.

And yet it is not the bulk of writing on Science that forms the only
or even the chief deterrent to the general comprehension of its
principles. The mass of scientific detail has always been beyond the
power of one mind to grasp. But as we have traced Rational Medicine
through its long course in Antiquity and the Middle Ages to its
debouchment on to our own time, we have found not only a more difficult
but also a new situation. In approaching our own age we have found ever
more difficulty in discussing Rational Medicine as a single channel of
thought. It spreads into a Delta, of which, though the many mouths may
inosculate, yet the tendency seems to be for an ever wider divergence.
This diffusion, induced by increased specialization, cannot go on
for ever without defeating the very objects for which specialism was
invented.

On the other hand, when we glance at the tasks now being performed by
the medical man, we cannot fail to be struck by the great increase
in the number of things that have come to be regarded as within his
sphere. It is a commonplace that he has in large part taken the place
of the parson. But he has also made encroachments on the functions of
the lawyer, the legislator and the judge, of the schoolmaster, the
architect and the statistician. He has assumed some of the duties of
the parent and guardian, while even the soldier and the policeman are
to some degree under his control. In the ordering of their lives,
and even in the regulation of their vices and the reform of their
shortcomings, men and women are far more willing to seek the advice and
help of the medical man than once they were. The reason is, without
doubt, that his advice is much more worth having than it once was.

The organization of research, the systematized record of experience,
the improved intercommunications of our time, have combined to
increase vastly the medical man’s sources of information and to make
his application of them more accurate and more scientific. Moreover,
there are factors in our social life itself that have tended not only
to deepen the physician’s knowledge but to widen his experience. His
effective working-day has greatly lengthened. No doubt, the motor car
and railway train are important elements in this extension of the
doctor’s day, but a far more fundamental element is the advent of the
skilled nurse. Many tasks which occupied the time of the doctor in the
old days are now relegated to her. The result is that the doctor sees
a far greater number of patients and has a much greater experience of
actual sickness than was formerly possible.

But after we have discussed all those factors which have gone to
the increase of the power of Physic we have still to consider the
philosophical basis which has conditioned this increase. Men do not
willingly accept that in which they do not believe. The shifting of
men’s trust implies a shifting in their faith. In truth the triumph
of Physic has underlying it a subtler triumph, that of Scientific
Determinism. The great increase in the detailed knowledge of Nature has
led to a great increase in the belief in the Reign of Law. Disease and
death were once thought to be the special acts of Providence. They are
now widely held to be illustrations of determined natural laws. Men
of science in general, and medical men in particular, are not wont to
profess themselves philosophers, but, in fact, much of their work is
done in a spirit which would have us believe that these determined laws
are universal and are wholly outside ourselves. Has there not arisen a
school that would claim that our thinking is but a seeming, and that
we do but behave as though we thought? Three centuries ago Descartes
conceived that the animal might be treated as a machine. If man be
but an animal, consequences are entailed from which Descartes shrank,
for the watchword of his philosophy was ‘Cogito, ergo sum’, _I think,
therefore I am_. There is a newer school whose work is intimately
bound up with the progress of Medicine that would abandon this basic
doctrine of the father of modern Philosophy, who is also the founder
of Physiology, as a separate discipline.

The position as it stands appears as a dilemma. The triumphs of
Science have been secured by disregarding Mind, and yet they cannot be
appreciated or advanced without invoking Mind. Unless we accept the
full conclusions of the Determinist Philosophy, we are forced to the
conclusion that Mind must do something to the animal body. If Mind
holds the reins, there must be a point at which Mind pulls the reins.
The matter ever in dispute is where that point may be. If life and
growth are bound up with an Entelechy, as seems to the author of this
work to be the case, there must somewhere and somehow be a level in the
organism at which the laws of physics and chemistry are transcended by
some other mode of action.

It is no part of our task to provide a Philosophy which will resolve
all the problems that our subject raises. Nevertheless, in the presence
of this dilemma, such a work should not close on too optimistic a note,
in the department either of medical thought or of its application. Even
if looked at merely as an interpreter of its own terms, determinist
thought, which lies at the basis of modern medical developments, has
not been quite so universally successful as is often supposed, and as
the preceding pages of this book may lead the reader to think. While
enormously increasing the sum of our knowledge of Nature, it has also
tended more and more to separate the parts of that knowledge from each
other. It is clear that no such way of thinking can ever give us a
survey of Nature as a whole. It can never enable us to ‘think things
together’, and without such thinking together our life is and must
remain a contradiction and a muddle.

For a real survey of Nature we must look to another Philosophy and
another Method. We are in this matter but just entering on a new era,
and may it not be that some sort of solution will be provided by a
better study of the Mind itself? Only by our minds can we know that
Nature presents us with any order at all. It therefore behoves us to
search out most diligently all that we can learn about our minds, to
see whether, on the one hand, this determined order, which has so
impressed our age, is in any degree within us and part of our observing
instrument, or whether, on the other hand, it is wholly without us.
There is much evidence that it is not wholly without us, and that
Determinism is a habit in our method of thinking on certain topics, and
that the emphasis on the ‘primary qualities’ (see pages 106-8) which we
inherit from Galileo is by no means justified. It may be that what we
think and feel and see is not only as real as what we weigh and count
and measure, but that weighing, counting, and measuring are but forms
of thinking, feeling, and seeing. In this connection the reader should
turn over again in his mind the implications of the ‘Law of Specific
Nerve Energies’ enunciated by Johannes Müller (see pp. 212-13).

Nor must we end on too optimistic a note as to the actual achievements
of Science. Advances in our knowledge have certainly been very great,
but they may be and often are exaggerated. We must always guard
ourselves against considering mere accumulation of detail as an
advance. The collection of data is but a means to an end, and if that
end is not reached they are a very weariness and vexation of the
philosophic spirit. Real advance in knowledge can only be tested by
effective advances in theory, and thus judged the cost of progress--the
cost in the brute accumulation of facts--has increased far more rapidly
than progress itself. What is wanted is not so much new data as
correlation in their accumulation. The increase in medical specialism
is not so much evidence of advance as it is of the heaping up of
uncoordinated observations.

Works on Medicine intended for popular consumption are often couched
in the jubilant terms of victory. Yet there are whole departments in
which no progress whatever has been made. We pride ourselves on the
advance in knowledge of infectious disease which the germ theory has
brought us, and yet we are utterly and completely ignorant of the two
things about infectious disease which are the two things most worth
knowing on that topic. Firstly, no man has conceived the way in which
the parasites of disease first fastened themselves on the animal body,
a specific parasite to a specific animal. In other words, we have not
the least idea how diseases first begin. Secondly, no man has conceived
a reason why diseases, distributed over a wide area and in many bodies,
should vary in virulence from time to time, why, for instance a
relatively mild condition, such as influenza, should suddenly devastate
the world. It is easy to say that human resistance varies, but that is
only to restate the problem in terms of which we know nothing. On these
high topics of Medicine we know as much and as little as Hippocrates.

Moreover, if we turn to definite diseases, there are many conditions,
and those among the most important, of which our ignorance is almost
complete. Thus of the very common and painful diseases, muscular
rheumatism and rheumatoid arthritis, we know hardly more than
Hippocrates and our remedies are but little more effective than his.
The common cold--economically the most important of all diseases, not
excluding Cancer and Tuberculosis--has a vast literature, but the
physician is almost helpless in its presence and can but let it run
its course. Measles, Whooping-cough, and Influenza have become more
deadly of late years. We have still no clear line of treatment for
them. Nor have we any real insight into the nature of Cancer. Those
who reach advanced age have no better chance of life than they had
two hundred years ago (p. 177). Above all, it must be remembered that
the great majority of deaths are caused by diseases theoretically
preventable. There is a natural term to life which it is desirable that
all should attain. Yet most of us will surely die a violent death as
truly as though struck down by a felon’s hand. Death from disease is an
unnatural and a violent death.

Faced by facts of this order there are those who constantly urge
increased activity in medical ‘research’. But research can only be
prosecuted by those whose talents specially fit them for the work.
With reason it may be and is doubted whether there are many in Western
Europe or America who could profitably be employed on medical research
who are not already so employed. It is easy to make investigations
on a certain level, but those best qualified to judge are of opinion
that the general level of medical research has fallen, not risen, of
late years. The number of publications has multiplied manyfold, but
there are those who doubt if there is much increase in investigation of
the first order. The increase in specialism and the extremely narrow
outlook of some workers has stultified much investigation, since with
his decreased range the researcher is often less able to perceive the
bearings of his own work. Thus he may labor for years elaborating a
technique by means of which he may collect facts without that guiding
wisdom or judgment that is the mark of genius. It must ever be borne
in mind that the object of fact-collecting is the deduction of law.
Not all facts can be collected, for facts are infinite in number, and
it is therefore necessary to select. Selection involves _judgment_,
the final and indefinable property of Mind; for, if from the facts no
laws emerge, the facts themselves become an obstacle, not an aid, to
scientific advance.

All who have to read systematically large masses of modern scientific
literature have been unfavorably impressed by its absence of form. It
is evident that a large proportion of scientific workers lack adequate
literary training and never acquire a proper sense of literary form.
The growing interest in Science has had an unfavorable effect on
Education in the direction of early and intensive specialization. The
result is that many scientific publications are but semi-literate,
they are often incoherent in presentation and even more frequently
unnecessarily diffuse. Nor is it merely a matter of form. Language is
but the outward and visible sign of which Thought is the inward and
spiritual reality. Confused writing usually indicates and always leads
to confused thinking. Thus the unliterary character of scientific
writing bids fair to pass from being a mere nuisance to become a great
scientific evil. Good and effective writing implies a broad and solid
literary background, just as good and effective scientific research
implies a broad and solid scientific background. The fact is that the
Humanities and the Sciences are far from being as independent of each
other as many suppose. If literary studies lead to clear and effective
expression and clear and effective thinking in the domain of Science,
scientific studies ventilate and inform and vitalize Literature. The
separation of the two disciplines, especially in the adolescent stage
of mental development, does an injury to both. The concentration of the
endowments of Learning on the scientific departments and especially on
the departments of applied science has given rise to a very widespread
evil which is none the less evil because it is subtle.

Within the sphere of the specifically medical sciences themselves there
are tendencies which are open to somewhat similar criticism.

The great fallacy from which scientific Medicine has suffered in the
past, and still to some extent suffers, is the ‘direct attack’. We
have come to look upon the animal organism as an immeasurably complex
machine. For its elucidation knowledge from the most diverse quarters
is therefore demanded. The physical chemist, the organic chemist,
the physicist, the mathematician, the protozoologist, the systematic
biologist, the botanist, the spectroscopist, the geologist, and a host
of others are following callings which have no obvious bearing on the
study of disease. Yet the results obtained by them, and by men of
science in many other departments, must be utilized in the study of
disease. Our knowledge of health and of disease thus depends on the
sciences as a whole--nay, on Knowledge as a whole. Those who would
promote the health of mankind would do well if they sought to encourage
not so much the medical sciences as Science as a whole, or rather
Learning as a whole, for Science is a way of life which may penetrate
into all departments of Learning, and is something far greater than
those discrete accumulations of knowledge that we call ‘the sciences’.
The Sciences, working out their destiny, must in the end come together
again.

If that consummation be reached we may expect improvement in health and
prolongation of life to a degree greater than any previous ages have
seen. We may indeed expect something yet better, for we may hope for a
philosophy of the mind that shall make life better worth the living.

Medicine cannot give immortality, but it should enable us all to live
out our full lives. Death, coming in due and not undue time, is shorn
of all his terrors, when every man and every woman

    Shall come to his grave in a full age,
    Like as a shock of corn cometh in, in his season.
        _Job_ v. 26.

