
1. Monkey and Wedge 
 
 
There was once a merchant who 
employed many carpenters and 
masons to build a temple in his 
garden. Regularly, they would 
start work in the morning; and 
take a break for the mid-day 
meals, and return to resume work 
till evening. 
  
One day, a group of monkey 
arrived at the site of the building 
and watched the workers leaving 
for their mid-day meals. 
 
One of the carpenters was sawing a huge log of wood. Since, it was only half-
done; he placed a wedge in between to prevent the log from closing up. He 
then went off along with the other workers for his meal. 
 
When all the workers were gone, the monkeys came down from the trees and 
started jumping around the site, and playing with the instruments. 
  
There was one monkey, who got curious about the wedge placed between 
the log. He sat down on the log, and having placed himself in between the 
half-split log, caught hold of the wedge and started pulling at it. 
  
All of a sudden, the wedge came out. As a result, the half-split log closed in 
and the monkey got caught in the gap of the log. 
  
As was his destiny, he was severely wounded. 
  
The wise indeed say: 
One, who interferes in other's work, surely comes to grief. 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
2. Jackal and Drum 
One day, a jackal called 
Gomaya was very hungry, and 
was wandering about in 
search of food. 
  
After some time, he wandered 
out of the jungle he lived in, 
and reached a deserted 
battlefield. 
  
In this deserted battlefield, a 
battle was fought recently. The 
fighting armies had left behind 
a drum, which was lying near 
a tree. 
 
As strong winds blew, the branches of the tree got rubbed against the drum. 
This made a strange noise. 
 
When the jackal heard this sound, he got very frightened and thought of 
running away, "If I cannot flee from here before I am seen by the person 
making all this noise, I will be in trouble". 
As he was about to run away, he had a second thought. "It is unwise to run 
away from something without knowing. Instead, I must be careful in finding 
out the source of this noise". 
  
He took the courage to creep forward cautiously. When he saw the drum, he 
realized that it was only the wind that was causing all the noise. 
  
He continued his search for food, and near the drum he found sufficient food 
and water. 
  
The wise indeed say: 
Only the brave succeed in life. 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
3. Fall and Rise of Merchant 
 
In a city called Vardhamana, 
lived a very efficient and 
prosperous merchant. 
  
The king was aware of his 
abilities, and therefore made him 
the administrator of the kingdom. 
  
With his efficient and intelligent 
ways, he kept common man very 
happy, and at the same time he 
impressed the king on the other 
side. Such a person, who can 
keep everybody happy, is rarely 
found. 
Later, there came a time that the merchant's daughter was getting married. 
He arranged for a lavish reception. 
The merchant not only invited the king and the queen, who obliged by 
attending, but he also invited the entire royal household and all respected 
people of the kingdom. 
  
During the reception, he ensured to provide his guests with the best of 
treatments. He gave out gifts to guests to show them respect for attending to 
his invitation. 
  
A servant of the royal household, who used to sweep the palace, was not 
invited but attended the reception. 
  
He took a seat which was reserved for royal nobles, not meant for common 
invitees. 
  
This made the merchant very angry. He caught him by the neck and ordered 
his servants to have him thrown out. 
  
The royal servant felt very insulted, and could not sleep all night. He thought, 
"If I can have the king to disfavour this merchant, I will have my revenge. But 
what can I, a common fellow, do to harm a powerful person as him". Thinking 
such, he suddenly had a plan. 
   
  
 
Several days later, the servant was sweeping the floor near the king's bed 
early in the morning. He observed that that the king was still in bed, half 
awake. The servant started mumbling, "Good heavens! The merchant has 
become so carefree now that he dared to embrace the queen!" 
  
When the king heard this lying in his bed, he jumped up and asked the 
servant, "Is it true? Have you seen the merchant embrace my queen 
yourself?" 
  
The servant at once fell at the king's feet, "O Master, I was gambling all night. 
I feel drowsy for I didn't sleep last night. I don't know what I have been 
mumbling, but I said anything improper, please forgive me." 
  
The king spoke no more, but the servant knew he had sowed the seed of 
distrust. The king thought, "It can be true! The servant moves about the 
palace freely, and so does the merchant. It is possible that the servant has 
seen something." 
  
The king was troubled with jealousy. From that day onwards, he withdrew his 
favours from the merchant and even forbade him to enter the palace. 
  
One day, when the merchant was entering the gateway to the palace, he was 
stopped by the guards. The merchant was surprised due to this sudden 
change in the king's attitude. 
  
The servant was nearby, and mocking shouted at the guards, "Ho Guards! 
That merchant is favoured by the king. He is a powerful person. He can have 
people arrested or released or even thrown out, just like he had me thrown 
out of his daughter's reception. Beware, for you may suffer the same fate." 
  
On hearing this, the merchant understood that the servant has caused all this 
trouble somehow. He felt dejected, and returned home upset over the 
incident. 
  
He gave everything a second thought, and then he invited the royal servant to 
his house. He treated the servant with utmost respect, and flattered him with 
gifts and garments. He said kindly, "O friend, that day I did not have you 
thrown out due to anger, but it was improper of you to occupy the seat 
reserved for the royal nobles. They felt insulted, and out of compulsion I had 
to throw you out. Please forgive me." 
  
The servant was already flattered with all the gifts, and he was full of joy, "Sir, 
I forgive you. You have not only expressed your regrets, but also honoured 
me with utmost respect". 
   
  
 
He ensured the merchant, "I will prove you how clever I am. I will have the 
king favourable towards you, like he was before". The servant went back 
home. 
  
Early next morning, when he started sweeping the floors of the palace, he 
waited till when the king was lying half-awake. 
  
When the opportunity came, he started sweeping around his bed and started 
mumbling, "Our king is crazy, he eats cucumber in the lavatory!" 
  
On hearing this, the king was taken aback. He got up angrily and shouted at 
the servant, "What nonsense do you talk about? Had you not been by royal 
servant, I would have punished you dearly. Have you ever seen me doing 
such thing yourself?" 
  
Once again the servant fell on his knees and prayed, "O Master, please 
forgive me if I said something improper. I was gambling all last night and 
didn't sleep. I feel drowsy and I don't know what I have been mumbling." 
  
The king thought to himself, "I have never eaten a cucumber in the lavatory. 
What he mumbled about me is ridiculously false. Surely then, what he 
mumbled about my trusted merchant the other morning must have been 
ridiculously false too. It was improper of me to mistreat the merchant." 
  
He wondered, "After all he has been so efficient in the whole administrative 
system, that without him it has become slack." 
  
Thus, having considered carefully, the king invited the merchant to the palace 
and flattered him with gifts, jewels and garments. He re-appointed the 
merchant to his previously held position, and favoured his services as before. 
  
The wise indeed say: 
One should treat one and all, even the lowest, with respect. 
 
 
  
  
 
4. Foolish Sage 
Once upon a time, there was a 
sage called Deva Sharma who 
lived in a temple in the outskirts 
of a town. 
  
He was widely known and 
respected. People would visit 
him, and offer him with gifts, 
food, money and garments to 
seek his blessings. The gifts that 
he did not need for himself, he 
would sell off, and got rich on the 
proceeds. 
 
 
And by nature, he trusted nobody. 
 
He never trusted anybody. So, he kept all his money in a bag which he 
carried under his arm all the time. He would not part with the bag for a single 
moment. 
  
One day, a swindler came across the sage, and he became sure that the bag 
this holy man was so possessive of, must surely contain a lot of treasure. 
  
He planned on stealing the bag from the sage, but could not think of a way to 
do so. He thought, "I cannot make a hole in the temple wall, or jump over the 
high gates. But I can charm him with sweet words to accept me as his 
disciple." 
  
He wondered, "If I can stay with him as a disciple, I can win his confidence. 
When I get an opportunity, I will rob him, and leave this place." 
  
Having planned so, the swindler approached the holy man with reverence, 
"Om Namah Shivaya! (I bow before Lord Shiva, the God of Destruction)" 
  
With these words, he fell on the sage's feet and said, "O Guruji, Please guide 
me to the right path of life. I am fed-up with life, and want to seek peace." 
  
The sage kindly replied, "My son, I will surely guide you. You are blessed 
because you have come to me to seek peace at this young age". 
  
  
  
 
This was the opportunity the swindler was seeking, and he at once touched 
the feet of the sage for blessings, "O Guruji, please accept me as your 
disciple. I will do whatever you ask me to do." 
  
The sage accepted the swindler as his disciple, but only on a condition. He 
said, "A holy man as me is recommended to spend the night alone without 
company. This helps me to meditate also. So, you will not be allowed to enter 
the temple at night. You will sleep in a hut at the gate of the temple." 
  
The swindler agreed, "I shall willingly serve your wishes in every way that you 
ask me to." 
  
In the evening, the sage initiated the rituals and formally took the swindler as 
his disciple. 
  
The swindler in return proved himself an obedient disciple. He massaged his 
hands and feet, washed his feet, and helped him with all the rituals along with 
cleaning the temple. Although the sage was happy with his disciple, the 
swindler could not gain enough confidence for the sage to part with his bag 
when he was around. 
  
As days passed by, the swindler started getting frustrated, "He does not trust 
me enough to leave the bag with me. I can gain access to the bag if I kill him 
with a knife or feed him with poison." 
  
When he was thinking all this, the swindler saw a young boy visit the sage. 
He was the son of one of the sage's followers. He invited the sage, "O Guruji, 
I have come here personally to invite you to our house for the ceremony of 
sacred thread. Please accept the invitation to sanctify the ceremony with your 
kind presence." 
  
The sage accepted the invitation, and after some time started off for the town 
with the swindler. On the way, they came across a river, where the sage 
thought of relieving himself. He folded the bagful of money in his robe. He 
asked his disciple to look after it, "My child, Look after the robe until I return". 
  
This was the opportunity that the swindler was seeking all the while. As soon 
as the sage went behind the bushes, the swindler ran away with the bagful of 
money. 
  
When the sage returned, he did not find the disciple around but found his 
robe lying on the ground. Shocked and anxious, he peered inside only to find 
his bag of money was gone. 
  
  
  
 
At once he knew what had happened, and began to shout, "Oh. Where are 
you, you rascal. You have robbed me." 
  
The sage then started trailing the swindler's footsteps, but he reached town. 
He knew he will not be able to catch hold of him. He stayed the night in town 
to return empty-handed to his temple next morning. 
   
The wise indeed say: 
Do not be taken in by the sweet words of a swindler. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
5. Fighting Goats and Jackal 
 
One day while a sage was going 
through a jungle, he saw two 
golden rams (billy goats) fighting 
each other. 
  
Even though both were wounded, 
and blood was oozing out from 
their heads and bodies, they did 
not stop fighting and rammed at 
each other. 
  
At the same time, a hungry jackal was passing by. When he saw all the 
blood, he started licking the blood from the ground without caring for the 
fighting rams.  
 
Watching all this, the sage thought to himself, "This jackal is a fool as it has 
become greedy by the smell of blood. If he comes between the fighting rams, 
it will get rammed and get hurt himself". 
 
No sooner had the sage thought of it, the jackal craving for more blood came 
nearer to the fighting rams, and got caught in the middle of their fight. 
  
Both the rams rammed into him by mistake. He got hit on his head, and fell 
down because he was severely wounded. 
  
The wise indeed say: 
Do not close your eyes to the impending danger due to greed. 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
6. Cobra and Crows 
There was a big banyan tree, 
where two crows - husband and 
wife, had prepared a nice nest 
and made it their home. In the 
hollow of the same tree, lived a 
black cobra. 
  
The crows had a problem 
because the black cobra would 
climb up the tree and eat the 
newborns, whenever the female 
crow hatched her eggs. They 
could do nothing to save them. 
 
 
The crows went to a jackal, who lived in a nearby banyan tree, to seek his 
advice. They narrated everything to him and requested his advice for them to 
get rid of their problem. 
 
They said, "O Friend, It has become dangerous to live here. Please tell us 
how we can protect our children from being eaten up by the wicked black 
cobra." 
  
The jackal replied, "Please don't give up. Even powerful enemies can be 
overcome with the use of wit." 
  
On hearing this, the crows requested, "O Friend, please tell us how we can 
overcome and destroy this wicked cobra." 
  
The jackal told them a plan, "Fly into the capital of the kingdom, not far from 
here. Visit the house of someone who is wealthy and careless at the same 
time. Notice if something of value is lying around. If you find so, pick it up 
when the servants are watching you." 
  
He continued, "You will need to fly slowly so that the servants can follow you. 
Return back to your tree and drop it in the hollow of the tree where the cobra 
lives. When the servants reach, they will kill the cobra when they see it." 
  
The crows decided to follow the jackal's advice and flew off immediately 
according to his plan. 
  
  
  
 
As they flew above the capital, the female crow noticed wealthy women 
swimming in a lake. They had left gold and pearl necklaces on the banks of 
the lake, which were guarded by royal servants. 
  
At once the female crow swooped down, and picked up a big necklace in her 
beak, and started flying slowly. 
  
When the royal servants noticed her, they picked up sticks and stones, and 
started throwing at her, and ran to chase her. 
  
As planned, she dropped the necklace in front of the hollow of the tree, where 
the black cobra was asleep. She sat on one of the branches for the royal 
servants to notice. 
  
When the royal servants arrived, the black cobra came out of the hollow of 
the tree to see what all the noise was about. The black cobra confronted the 
king's servants with swelling hood, but the servants attacked the cobra with 
sticks and stones to recover the necklace. 
  
They killed the wicked cobra, and returned with the necklace. And the crows, 
having gotten rid of the cobra, lived happily. 
  
The wise indeed say: 
Even a very powerful enemy can be destroyed through deceit. 
 
 
  
  
 
7. Crafty Crane and Craftier Crab 
 
A heron lived near a big lake, 
which was full of fishes and other 
water creatures. 
  
The heron had grown so old, that 
he could not catch fishes from 
the lake anymore. 
  
He became lean and weak with 
every passing day due to lack of 
food. Unable to bear the hunger 
anymore, he hit upon a plan. 
 
As planned, he sat at the edge of the lake for everybody to see, and began 
crying. 
 
On seeing this, a crab took pity on him and went near, "Uncle, What is the 
matter? Why are you crying instead to catching fishes?" 
  
Continuing to pretend, the heron replied, "My child, I would not touch any fish 
anymore. I have decided to renounce all worldly matters, and vowed to 
undertake a fast unto death". 
  
The crab asked, "If you have indeed renounced worldly matters, why is it that 
you cry?" 
  
The heron explained, "My child, I have been in this lake from my birth. I have 
grown here. And it now that I have grown so old that I hear that this lake will 
dry up as there will be no rains for the next twelve years". 
  
The crab was surprised to hear this, "Uncle, please tell me if it is true. Please 
tell me where you have heard such thing." 
  
The heron replied, "I have heard the news from a wise astrologer that there 
will be no rains for the next twelve years. You see, there is already not much 
water in the lake. And very soon, due to lack of rains, the lake will dry up 
completely very soon." 
  
The crab was taken aback by the news of what is to befall on them, and went 
to tell this to the other water creatures. On hearing this piece of news, 
everybody started to panic. 
   
  
 
They believed the heron, as he was not trying to catch any fish at all. So, they 
met the heron to seek advice, "Please guide us to save us from this disaster" 
  
The heron said, "There is indeed a lake not far from here. It is full of water, 
and beautifully covered with lotus flowers. There is so much water in the lake, 
which it would not dry even if it did not rain for twenty four years. I can take 
you there, if you can ride on my back." 
  
He had already gained their confidence. So, they gathered around him and 
requested to carry them one at a time to the other lake and save them. 
  
The wicked heron had succeeded in his plan. Every day, he would carry one 
of them on his back pretending to take them to the other lake. 
  
After flying a little away from the lake, he would smash them against a rock 
and eat them up. He would then return after some time to the lake and relate 
false messages how they are happy in the other lake. 
  
This happened for many days, when the crab said to the heron, "Uncle, you 
take others to the lake but it is me who is your first friend. Please take me to 
the other lake to save my life." 
  
The heron was happy to hear this. He thought to himself, "Having a fish 
everyday has become monotonous. It is good that I will get to eat a crab 
today, for a change." 
  
Having thus decided, the heron started carrying the crab to the same rock. 
The crab looked down from above and saw the heap of bones and skeletons. 
At once, the crab understood what the heron was up to. 
  
He remained calm, and said to the heron, "Uncle, the lake seems far and I 
am quite heavy. You must be getting tired, let us stop for some rest". 
  
The heron was confident that there was no way the crab can escape from him 
in the sky. The heron replied, "There is no lake for real. This trip is for my own 
meal. As I do every day, I will smash you against a rock and make a meal out 
of you." 
  
When the heron confessed the truth, the crab got hold of the heron's neck 
with its strong claws, and strangled him to death. 
  
The crab laughed at himself that he had saved himself and the other water 
creatures from the trick played by the heron. He dragged the heron back to 
the lake. 
   
  
 
The other water creatures in the lake were surprised to see him back. They 
became curious, and asked all sort of questions. 
  
The crab laughed and replied, "We were being made fools! The heron was an 
imposter and what he told about the lake drying up was all false. He was 
taking one of us every day for his meal in a rock not far from here." 
  
He proudly said, "I understood what he was up to, and have killed the 
trickster. There is no need to worry, for we are safe in this lake. It is not going 
to dry up at all." 
   
The wise indeed say: 
When things go wrong, use your wit to overcome the situation. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
8. Cunning Hare and Witless Lion 
There was once a powerful lion 
called Bhasuraka who ruled the 
jungle. He was merciless and 
killed other animals 
indiscriminately. 
  
One day, all the animals went 
together to the lion to surrender. 
They said, "O Master, you kill 
many of us every day without 
necessity. One animal a day is 
enough to satisfy your hunger. 
Please come to an understanding. 
Starting from today, we promise to 
offer one amongst us to you every 
day. In this way, you will not have 
to hunt and many of our lives will 
be spared." 
 
 
Hearing this, the lion agreed, "It is true, but I warn you, if I do not receive an 
animal every day, I shall proceed to kill every one of you." 
  
In accordance to the understanding, the animals drew lots, and the unlucky 
animal that got chosen was sent to the lion. The others roamed about the 
jungle without any fear of being attacked by the lion. 
  
One day, a hare was chosen. Unwilling to become the lion's food, he started 
for the lion's den. He walked as slowly as possible. 
  
On the way, the hare came across a well. It peeked down from the edge and 
when it saw it's own reflection, he hit upon a plan. 
  
He thought, "I have a plan that will not fail. I will deceive the lion and lead him 
to his death". 
  
On this, the hare walked towards the lion's den, even slower than before. 
  
Finally, when the hare reached the lion's den, the lion was hungry and 
furious. He had been waiting for his food for the entire day. 
  
  
  
 
He licked his lips in hunger, and thought of killing as many animals the next 
morning as he could. While he was thinking so, the hare approached the lion 
and humbly bowed. 
  
The furious lion began to shout, "You are a miserable animal. You are not 
only late, but also very small. I will first kill you and satisfy my hunger, and 
then kill all the rest of the animals for doing this to me". 
  
The hare replied humbly, "O Master, It is neither my fault nor the fault of any 
other animal. Please allow me to explain before you kill me". 
  
The lion roared, "Be quick. Give me an explanation fast for I am very hungry". 
  
The hare started, "Today it was my turn to be offered to you. But because I 
am small and would not be able to satisfy your hunger, four more hares were 
sent along with me". 
 
On the way, we met a lion who came out of his den and roared, and got ready 
to eat us. We pleaded to him that we were going to fulfil our master's hunger 
as promised every day. 
  
He roared, "I am the master of this jungle. From today, you will offer 
yourselves to me and none other. The other lion is an imposter. If not, let him 
accept my challenge to a trial of strength. Whoever proves to be stronger, will 
rule the jungle. I will allow one of you hares to carry this message to him, and 
hold the rest of you as hostages." 
  
The hare humbly continued, "This is the reason only I, among the five of us, 
am here. I have arrived late for the same reason. Please take action that you 
think will be best". 
  
On hearing this, the lion grew even more furious. He roared, "Take me to this 
pretender at once. I will destroy him. Only after that will my anger be 
quenched." 
  
The hare quickly replied, "O master, I must warn you that this lion stays inside 
a very strong den. It is difficult to attack someone who takes shelter in a 
stronghold. Furthermore, I have seen him myself, he seemed very strong". 
  
The lion roared, "That is not your concern. Take me to him at once". 
  
The hare then led the lion to the well he had come across on his way. 
  
  
  
 
On reaching, the hare pointed towards the well and said to the lion, "O 
master, we have no doubt on your powers. The lion has hidden himself inside 
that stronghold". 
  
The witless lion stood at the edge of the well, and saw his own reflection in 
the water below. He thought it to be the lion who had challenged him. 
  
He roared at his reflection with all might and fury. The roar sounded back, re-
echoed from the well. 
  
On hearing this, the lion got furious and leapt inside the well to attack his own 
reflection. He got drowned. 
  
The hare was very happy that his plan had worked successfully. He danced 
his way back to the other animals and told them what had happened. 
  
The other animals gave the hare a hero's welcome and praised his 
cleverness. From then onwards, the animals roamed about the jungle happily. 
  
The wise indeed say: 
Deceive the wicked and destroy them without mercy. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
9. Bug and Poor Flea 
 
Mandavisarpini was a white flea. 
She lived in the folds of the 
exquisite white silk sheet that 
covered the bed of a king in a 
certain country. 
  
She fed on the king's blood 
without anybody noticing, and 
was happy to spend her days. 
  
One day, a bug managed to 
enter the beautifully decorated 
bedroom of the king. 
  
When the flea saw him, she 
warned, "O Bug, what are you 
doing in the king's bedroom. 
Leave at once before you get 
caught!" 
 
The bug replied, "Madam, even if I were a good-for-nothing bug, this is not 
the way to treat a guest. One should welcome a guest with humble words, 
sweet behaviour and offer refreshments" 
 
The bug continued, "I have fed myself with all types of blood, but never have I 
had the pleasure of the blood of a king. It must be very sweet, for the king 
eats the choicest of food. I would love to taste the king's blood, if you permit." 
  
The flea was taken aback, "O Bug, you have a nasty bite, like a sharp needle. 
Besides, I feed on the king's blood only when he is deep into his sleep. I can 
permit you to feed on the king's blood only if you promise to wait till he is 
asleep." 
  
The bug agreed, "I promise to wait till the king is asleep, and only after you 
have fed yourself, will I feed myself on his blood." 
  
Soon after they decided on such terms, the king came to his bedroom and lay 
down to sleep. 
  
The bug could not control himself, and decided to take a tiny bite of the king, 
without waiting. As the king was yet to fall asleep, he jumped at the sharp bite 
of the bug.  
  
 
The king shouted at his servants, "Hey, there is something in my bed that has 
bitten me. Look for it, as I have already been bitten." 
  
On hearing this, the bug quickly hid himself in a corner of the bed, before the 
servants could start searching for him. 
  
However, the servants scrutinized the entire bed, sheet by sheet, and found 
the flea between the folds. They killed her at once, and the king went to sleep 
without any more worries. 
  
The wise indeed say: 
The false promises of friends as well as strangers have no value. You 
end up paying for it. 
 
 
  
  
 
10. Story of Blue Jackal 
Once, there lived a jackal 
named Chandarava. 
  
One day he was very hungry, 
and could not find any food. 
 
So, he wandered into a nearby 
village in search of food. 
  
The dogs in the village saw the 
jackal, and a group of dogs 
surrounded him, barking and 
attacking with their sharp teeth. 
 
 
The jackal started running to save itself, but the dogs chased. 
 
In an attempt to flee from the dogs, he ran into a house, which belonged to a 
washerman. 
  
There was a big vat of blue dye inside. 
  
As he jumped without knowing, his entire body was dyed in blue colour. He 
no longer looked like a jackal. 
  
Frustrated, he came out. When the dogs saw him again, they were unable to 
recognize him anymore. Fearing that it was an unknown animal, they became 
terrified and ran off in all directions. 
  
The disappointed jackal went back to the jungle, but the blue dye would not 
come off. 
  
When the other animals in the jungle saw this blue-coloured jackal, they ran 
away in terror. They said to themselves, "This is an unknown animal, and we 
don't know the strength of this new animal. It is better to run away." 
  
When the jackal realized that all the animals were running away. He called 
back at the frightened animals and said, "Hey animals! Why are you running 
away? Don't be afraid. Brahma, the Lord of all creations, has me made me 
himself, with his own hands. Brahma said to me, 'The animals in the jungle do 
not have a proper king. Go to the jungle and protect the animals.'" 
  
  
  
 
"That is the reason I have come here", he continued, "Come and live in peace 
in my kingdom and under my protection. I have been crowned the King of all 
three worlds (Heaven, Earth and Hell) 
  
The other animals were convinced, and they surrounded him as his subjects, 
and said "O Master, we await your commands. Please let us know whatever 
you want". 
  
The 'blue' jackal assigned specific responsibilities to every animal. They were 
mostly on how to serve him. But he did not have anything to do with the other 
jackals, and did not want to come near them in fear of being recognized. So, 
the jackals of the jungle were chased away. 
  
And so it went, while the smaller animals would serve him with his other 
needs, the lions and the tigers would go out to hunt for prey, and place them 
before the jackal every day. 
He would then distribute the food amongst other animals, and himself. 
  
In this manner, he discharged his royal duties, for all the animals under his 
kingdom. 
 
Quite some time elapsed in this way, and there was peace between animals. 
  
One evening, the 'blue' jackal heard a pack of jackals howling at a distance. 
  
Unable to overcome his natural instinct, he was so spellbound that he was 
filled with tears of joy. He immediately sat up, and began to howl like every 
other jackal. 
  
When the lion and the other animals heard this, they realized how he was 
only a jackal and how they have been fooled all the time. 
  
They held their heads down in shame, but only for a moment - because, they 
became very angry on the jackal for fooling them. 
  
They angrily said to each other, "This jackal has fooled us. We will not let him 
live anymore. He should be punished." 
  
When the jackal realized, he tried to flee from them. But the animals got hold 
of him and he got severely beaten by them. 
  
The wise indeed say: 
One, who treats his own people with scorn, shall surely suffer a bitter 
end. 
  
  
 
11. Lion, Camel, Jackal and Crow 
 
There was once a jungle that was 
ruled by a lion called Madotkata, 
who had a leopard, a jackal and a 
crow at his service, along with 
other animals. 
  
As they did regularly, they were 
wandering about the jungle one 
day, when the lion saw a camel at 
a distance. This camel had 
separated from its caravan and 
was feeding itself on the green 
grass of the jungle. 
The lion took a fancy on this animal that he had not seen before, "Let us go 
and ask this extraordinary animal, where he comes from." 
 
The crow, who flies to far-off places was aware and replied, "Master, it is 
called a camel and this animal lives in villages. The flesh of this animal tastes 
good, let us kill it and eat it." 
  
But the lion disagreed, "He does not belong to the jungle, so he is our guest. I 
will not kill it. Please go and assure him that no harm will be done, and bring 
him to me". 
  
As per the lion's instruction, they went to the camel and assured him that they 
were to bring it to the lion. They won its confidence, and they brought the 
camel to the lion. 
  
The camel stood before the lion and bowed. He also narrated how he had 
gotten separated from his caravan and how he had reached the jungle. 
  
On hearing this, the lion said, "Oh Camel, if you return to the village you will 
be made a beast to carry burden again. Stay in the jungle under my kingdom 
instead. You can feast on the abundant green grass of the jungle without any 
fear." 
  
The camel accepted the offer, and they began to live together in peace. 
  
Later one day, the lion got severely wounded in a fight with a mad elephant. 
Such were his injuries that he could not take a few steps, let alone go out of 
his for hunting.  
  
 
Due to lack of food, the lion became weaker. The animals who served him 
were also starving since they were dependent on the lion for their food. 
  
When the lion could not bear anymore, he called them and said, "Go and find 
any animal that I can prey upon even in my weak condition. This way I can 
provide food for you, and also for myself." 
  
All the animals wandered about the jungle without any success to find such 
an animal. On their way back, the jackal had a plan. 
  
He said to the crow, "There is no point wandering about the jungle when the 
food is right in front of us. The camel can provide us with the food for all of us 
for a long time." 
  
The crow replied, "Indeed, what you say is correct. But the master has 
assured the camel of his safety under his rule. He will refuse to kill him." 
  
The jackal said, "Leave that to me. I will influence the master in a manner that 
he will agree to feast on the camel. You wait till I return after a discussion with 
the lion". 
 
The jackal met the lion and said, "Master, we have been looking all around 
the jungle but could not find an animal for you. All of us have not had food for 
so long that we can hardly walk properly. Under this circumstance, if you 
agree to kill the camel, his flesh can provide food for all of us". 
  
The lion disagreed, "Shame on you! How can I kill the camel when he has my 
assurance that his life will be safe under my kingdom. It is a sin to think 
likewise." 
  
But the jackal continued, "Master, it would indeed be a sin to kill him after you 
have given him the assurance of his safety. But if he offers himself as your 
food by himself, it would then not be a sin to kill him and accept his offer." 
  
The jackal continued, "What good are we, if we cannot be of our master's 
service in his time of need. Please kill one of us for yourself, and the others to 
save the rest of us from dying of hunger." 
  
The lion failed to justify the jackal and said, "Please do what you think would 
be in the best for all of us." 
  
After this, the jackal returned to the other animals and declared, "Our master 
is sick and weak. If something happened to him, there would not be anyone 
to protect us. We have failed to get any animal after wandering throughout 
the jungle. The only way now to repay our debts to our master would be to 
offer ourselves to him. This way the rest of us would be saved from dying of 
hunger too."  
  
 
As planned, all of them stood before the lion and bowed. They informed the 
lion that they did not succeed to find any animal for their food. 
  
The crow said, "Master, we could not find an appropriate animal for your food. 
So, I offer myself. Please eat me to save yourself from hunger." 
  
The jackal interrupted, "You are too small to provide flesh for the master. 
Even if he agrees your offer, it will not be enough for his survival. Indeed, you 
have proven your devotion and by offering yourself, you have already freed 
yourself from the debts of the master." 
  
He turned to the lion and said, "Please accept my offer instead." 
  
The jackal stood humbly before the lion, "Master, please eat me to save 
yourself from hunger. If you accept my sacrifice, I will be honoured with a 
place in heaven". 
  
On hearing this, the lion shook his head in refusal. This way, the other 
animals started offering themselves, but the lion kept refusing to accept their 
offer. 
  
The camel who was observing all this thought, "All of them speak beautifully 
about offering themselves, but the master refuses to kill any of them. I shall 
seek to impress the master in a similar fashion." 
  
Thinking such, the camel said to the other animals, "You have offered 
yourself, but the master cannot eat you because all of you are carnivores and 
belong to the same category as the lion himself. Stand by, for I shall offer 
myself". 
  
With this, the camel came forward and bowed before the lion. 
  
He said, "Master, you need not kill any of these animals. Please eat me 
instead. I offer myself in return to your debts. I shall find my way to the 
heaven, if you may please accept my offer". 
  
No sooner had he made the offer, the other animals cheered. Having already 
been influenced by the jackal, the lion jumped on him. He was killed, and 
eaten by all the animals together. 
  
The wise indeed say: 
Always be on guard when you are in the company of wicked people. Do 
not be taken in by their sweet words. 
 
 
  
  
 
12. Bird Pair and Sea 
A pair of Tittibha birds, husband 
and wife lived on seashore. The 
female Tittibha bird was 
expecting to lay eggs and raise a 
family. 
  
When the time to lay eggs came, 
she asked her husband to look 
for a safe place to lay her eggs, 
"My dear, please look for some 
good and safe place for me to lay 
eggs as it is almost time for me 
to lay the them." 
 
 
But the male Tittibha bird said, "Dearest, where in the world could be a better 
place than this seashore? Please lay your eggs here." 
 
She disagreed, "The waves of sea on full moon nights are so high that they 
can drag even an elephant into it. No, please find a place away from here." 
 
The male Tittibha bird laughed and insisted, "The Sea would not even dare to 
do any harm to my children! Do not fear unnecessarily and lay eggs here 
without any worries." 
  
All the time, the Sea had been hearing this, and thought, "From a small bird 
as he, such impudence is not expected. I'll certainly take away his eggs to 
see what he does after that and teach him a lesson." 
  
Within a few days, the female Tittibha bird laid her eggs in the seashore. 
Shortly afterward, when the birds went away in search of food, the Sea 
started making waves. The waves became higher and higher, till it swallowed 
the eggs into it. 
  
The birds returned later to find the nest empty. The female Tittibha bird 
started weeping bitterly, "See for yourself that the waves of the sea has 
swallowed our eggs. You are a fool not to listen to me when I asked you to 
find a safe place to lay eggs." 
  
The male Tittibha bird continued its stupidity, "Dear, don't you worry. I will 
prove to you how brilliant I am. I will dry the sea, and force it to return our 
eggs." 
   
  
 
The female Tittibha bird wondered, "How can you dry this enormous sea?" 
  
The male Tittibha bird explained, "Even small beings can overcome the 
strongest opponents if they are zealous. And so, I plan to dry up the whole 
sea by sucking its water with my beak." 
  
The wife argued, "How can you suck the sea dry, when rivers like the Ganges 
and Indus, and hundreds of other rivers flow into it. There is no good in this 
babbling". While the husband argued, "I'll work day and night to suck all the 
water from the sea with my beak, which is as solid as iron. Man can succeed 
only after putting efforts". 
  
The female Tittibha bird understood that she will not be able to convince him, 
"Dear, there is no point in arguing. If you want to conquer the sea, please call 
for your friends to help you". The husband agreed, "All right, I will do this with 
the help of my friends". 
  
Now, all the friends of the male Tittibha bird were called and when they all 
gathered together, the male Tittibha bird explained his problem with the sea, 
and how it had insulted him, and how he plans to dry the sea to seek 
revenge. 
  
All the birds, the swan, crane, peacock and other unanimously agreed that 
the task was impossible, "There is no good in this babbling. It is impossible 
for us to suck the sea to dry it up completely. Instead, let us visit our king, 
Garuda (Lord Vishnu's vehicle, and the king of birds according to Hindu 
mythology). When he comes to know that we have been harassed by the sea, 
he will get angry and seek revenge. Even if we merely pay him a visit to seek 
his advice, we shall feel relieved." 
  
As decided, they all went to their king, Garuda, and explained the reason of 
them being so sad, "O King, the sea has robbed the eggs of the good Tittibha 
birds even after the fact that you are our protector. If this is allowed to 
continue, our entire race shall perish." 
  
Garuda realized that the birds were in grave circumstances, and agreed to go 
and dry the entire sea. Just as he was leaving, a messenger arrived from 
Lord Vishnu who needed his assistance at once, for some divine task. 
  
Garuda explained to the messenger that he was unable to serve his master at 
this time, "I am such a common servant to the Lord for him to need me. The 
sea, which is the resting place of the Lord, has swallowed the eggs of the 
Tittibha birds. I refuse to serve him if he will not force the sea to return the 
eggs at once. This is my firm resolution. Please let him know of it." 
   
  
 
When Lord Vishnu came to know of Garuda's resolution from his messenger, 
he thought, "I can understand his behaviour and need to pacify him. He is the 
king and protector of all the birds. I must meet Garuda at once." 
  
As Lord Vishnu visited Garuda, he bowed in respect and explained, "O 
Master, the sea, which is your resting place has insulted me by swallowing 
the eggs of my humble servant, the good Tittibha birds. It is out of the respect 
that I have for you that I have not taken any step for revenge." 
  
Lord Vishnu considered his plea, "Come with me Garuda. You are right. The 
sea should not have done such a thing on purpose. Let us go and return the 
eggs to the Tittibha birds. After that we will leave, as I need your assistance." 
  
They all went to the seashore where Lord Vishnu reprimanded the sea. 
Taking a thunderbolt in his hand, he warned, "O Sea, you have been wicked. 
Return the eggs of the Tittibha birds at once or dare to face my anger." 
  
When the sea heard the warning from the Lord Vishnu himself, it was 
terrified. It apologised at once, and returned the eggs to the Tittibha birds. 
  
The wise indeed say: 
Do not underestimate the power of the timid. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
13. Turtle that Fell off Stick 
 
There lived a turtle called 
Kambugriva in a lake, who had 
two swans as her good friends. 
  
All three of them would meet on 
the banks of the lake every day, 
and exchanged stories, before 
returning at sunset. They enjoyed 
each other's company. 
  
One year, there was no rain and 
lake started to dry. The swans got 
worried about the declining water 
level of the lake, and said to the 
turtle, "You will not be able to 
survive in this lake. All the water 
in the lake will soon dry up". 
The turtle was aware of the problem, "It is indeed difficult to live here 
anymore. Dear friends, please look for an alternate lake which is full of water. 
Then, find a strong stick from somewhere." 
  
The turtle continued, "Once you find another lake, you can carry me to the 
lake with a stick. I can hold the stick tightly with my mouth, while both of you 
can hold the stick at either ends and fly". 
  
As planned, the swans flew to distant places and after some time found a 
lake which had plenty of water in it. They returned to carry the turtle. 
  
They prepared to hold the stick from both the ends, and suggested the turtle, 
"Dear friend, everything seems fine. But make sure to keep your mouth tightly 
shut all the time. You must not speak, or you will fall off." 
  
Finally, they started flying. After some time, they had flown some distance 
when the turtle saw a town below. 
  
The people of the town were staring at the sight of two swans carrying a turtle 
in the sky. "Look at that! This is a rare sight that two birds are carrying a turtle 
with the help of a stick", they shouted in admiration. 
  
On hearing all the commotion, the turtle opened her mouth, "What is all the 
commotion about?", she asked.  
  
 
Needless to say, she went down the moment she opened her mouth, and the 
swans could do nothing to stop her from falling down to the earth. 
  
As she fell down, the people of the town captured her to make a feast out of 
her. 
  
The wise indeed say: 
Never fail to listen to the advice of your friends. 
 
 
  
  
 
14. Tale of Three Fishes 
Three fishes named 
Anagatavidhata, 
Pratyutpannamati and 
Yadbhavishya lived in a certain 
pond, along with many other 
fishes. 
  
One afternoon, some fishermen 
were passing by the pond. They 
investigated the pond, and 
agreed that the pond was full of 
fishes. Since, they were already 
returning after catching fishes, 
and already had a big haul, they 
decided to come back the next 
morning. 
 
  
They discussed, "This pond is full of fishes, and there are many big ones too. 
We have never caught fishes in this pond. Let us come back tomorrow 
morning." 
 
The three fishes were swimming on the surface when they heard the 
fishermen discuss their plans. 
  
The first fish panicked. He immediately assembled all other fishes and told 
them what they had heard. He said, "Tomorrow morning, the fishermen will 
arrive to catch us. I do not want to die like this. So, I will leave with my family 
at the earliest. I advise all of you to follow me. It will not be wise for anybody 
to stay here any longer!" 
  
The second fish agreed, "I shall follow you, my friend, for what you say is 
correct. It will be unwise to remain here anymore!" 
  
But the third fish disagreed. He laughed at the two fishes, and said to the 
fishes assembled, "See how cowardly these two act! This pond belonged to 
our forefathers, and it is our home now. For so long, no harm has ever come 
to the fishes of this pond." 
  
He continued, "Just because some fishermen were discussing their plans, is 
no reason for us to panic and leave our home. Those who agree with me, I 
advise them to stay where we belong and not go to some unknown place." 
  
  
  
 
He further said, "O Friends, the scriptures state that when the time for one's 
death arrives, one is not spared. If death has to come, let us rather die 
bravely in our home!" 
  
Thus, the fishes of the pond got divided into two groups. The group that 
wanted to stay laughed at the other group. However, within the very evening, 
the families of the first two fishes started their journey to a different pond 
through a small outlet. They were followed by many who believed them. 
  
The next morning the fishermen arrived as they had planned, and trapped all 
the fishes that remained in the pond by casting net all over the pond. 
  
Not a single fish was spared, and the fishermen were overjoyed with the big 
haul of fishes that they had caught. 
  
The wise indeed say: 
When you see a danger coming, act immediately. 
 
  
  
 
15. Elephant and Sparrow 
 
A couple of sparrows lived 
happily in their nest on top of a 
huge tree in a jungle. 
  
The female sparrow had laid her 
eggs in the nest and they were 
expecting their newborns soon. 
  
On a particular day, unable to 
bear the heat of the summer sun, 
an elephant went berserk. 
  
He crashed into all trees in his 
way. On his way, he broke the 
branches of the tree that 
supported the nest of the sparrow 
couple. 
 
As the branches fell, so did the nest and all the newly laid eggs smashed 
against the ground. 
 
Although the sparrows managed to escape by flying away, they were heart-
broken to see that they had lost the eggs. The female sparrow began to cry 
and wail loudly. 
  
A woodpecker, who was at a little distance, was touched by cries. 
  
He went to her and said, "Dear good sparrow! There is nothing you can do by 
crying. What is destined to happen, will happen for sure." 
  
The female sparrow replied, "That is indeed true. But all my children were 
killed by this wicked elephant, this is also true. We had done no harm to him." 
  
"If you consider yourself to be a friend", continued the female sparrow, 
"Please suggest me a way to destroy this elephant and avenge the death of 
my children". 
  
"So I will", replied the woodpecker, "I have a fly as a friend. Let us go and ask 
for her help to destroy this cruel elephant". 
  
  
  
 
Thus, the woodpecker and the female sparrow went to meet the fly. The 
woodpecker explained, "My friend, please meet this sparrow. She is a dear 
friend of mine. Her eggs were destroyed by a wicked elephant; please help us 
find a way to destroy this cruel elephant." 
  
"I will certainly help you", the fly said after hearing the events, "How can I be 
your friend, and yet not help you when you need me. I have a frog as a good 
friend, let us seek his help to destroy this wicked elephant." 
  
Thus, the female sparrow, woodpecker and the fly went to the frog, and 
explained him of all the events for which they had come to him for help. 
  
The old frog said after hearing everything, "The elephant is big, but he is 
alone. What can this elephant do, if we work together to destroy him? I have 
a plan!" 
  
He explained, "Fly! When the sun is scorching, your task would be to buzz in 
his ears. When he closes his eyes in sheer ecstasy, the woodpecker's task 
would be to peck his eyes and make him blind. In this scorching summer, he 
will certainly search for water, but being blinded already he will not be able to 
do so. I will then sit on the edge of the nearby pit and croak at the top of my 
voice." 
  
He continued, "When the thirsty elephant hears me, he will think there is a 
pond or lake nearby and follow my voice. And when he does so, he will fall 
into the pit and perish. This way, we can avenge the death of the sparrow's 
children!" 
  
The others agreed to the plan, and organized to do their part of the tasks as 
laid by the old frog. 
  
They executed their tasks successfully, and the elephant fell into a muddy pit 
and was severely wounded. 
  
The wise indeed say: 
Even the low and humble achieve results when they work together. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
16. Lion and Jackal 
There lived a lion called 
Vajradaunstra in the jungle, who 
had two attendants, a jackal and 
a wolf. 
  
One day a caravan was passing 
by, and one of the camels in the 
caravan was an expectant 
female. As she was not able to 
walk, and was in labour pains, 
the caravan set her free and left 
her behind. 
 
  
Within moments, she fell prey to the lion, and while the three of them were 
eating. They cut the womb of the camel, from which a baby camel came out. 
 
Since, it was just a baby, and they already had a good meal out of the camel, 
the lion decided to spare the baby camel's life. He brought the baby camel 
home. 
  
The lion said to the little camel, "From now onwards you will live with us, and 
will have nothing to fear from, even me. I will let everybody know that you are 
under my protection, and you can wander about fearlessly and feed on the 
green grass of the jungle." 
  
From then onwards, they lived happily. The four of them would tell each other 
stories; the camel was always found along with the lion. 
  
One day, the lion returned home badly injured after a fight with a wild 
elephant. He was unable to even walk, let alone go out and hunt. 
  
Unable to bear the hunger, he asked the camel, jackal and the wolf to go in 
search of some small animal that he will be able to kill, even in his condition. 
Thus, the hunger for all three of them would be satisfied. But the three of 
them returned empty-handed in the evening, even after their efforts to search 
for an animal. 
  
The jackal began wondering in hunger, "The young camel does not belong 
amongst us, and he will be able to provide food for many days. But, I have to 
be cunning to convince the lion to kill him, as he has promised not to harm 
him." 
   
  
 
He said to the camel, "Our master will soon die of hunger, and so will we. I 
and the wolf will die of starvation, and some other animal will prey on you 
after they know that there is nobody to protect you anymore. I suggest you 
must offer yourself to the lion, and save us from dying. For your sacrifice, you 
will be reborn in a body twice the size of what you have in this life!" 
  
The young camel agreed immediately, "Had it not been for the lion, I would 
have been dead long ago. I shall be rewarded hundred-times for my sacrifice, 
and find a place in heaven. I agree to offer my body." 
  
In the evening, the jackal said to the lion, that the camel will be blessed with 
twice the size of the body in his next birth, if he killed him and worshipped 
God before eating him. He explained that the camel was willing to offer his 
body for this sacrifice. 
  
The lion was convinced by the cunning jackal and he agreed. As soon the 
jackal was able to convince him, he jumped on the young camel and tore him 
apart. The young camel died instantly. 
 
The lion remembered that he must worship before eating for the young 
camel's next life and asked the jackal and wolf to guard over the carcass, 
while he returned. He then went for a bath and worshiped the gods. 
  
When the lion was gone, the jackal thought, "How can I fool the lion and have 
the entire camel for myself?" 
  
He thought of a plan, and called out to the wolf, "Hey wolf! I know you are 
unable to tolerate the hunger anymore. Eat a mouthful of the camel's flesh 
and I will convince the lion by making up a story." 
  
The wolf started eating some, believing the jackal's words. Just then the 
jackal alerted, "Here comes the lion, stop eating now!" 
  
When the lion returned, the wolf had stopped eating. But the lion noticed that 
his food had been contaminated. He roared in anger, "How is it that my food 
is contaminated despite it being guarded by the two of you?" 
  
The jackal smiled at the wolf, "I advised you not to eat, but you would not 
listen. You could not tolerate your hunger and wait for the king's return! You 
should be ashamed of yourself!" 
  
The lion noticed the blood on the wolf's paw, and attacked it. The wolf, 
realizing that he would die if he did not flee, ran for his life to never return 
again. 
   
  
 
At the very moment a very big caravan approached. The camels in the 
caravan had large bells around their necks, and the jingling sound could be 
heard from a distance. The lion was surprised by the unusual and terrifying 
noise and wanted to know what made the noise. 
  
At once, the jackal used it as an opportunity. He said, "O Master, it is the 
same caravan returning. Only this time, it is led by Yama (God of death). He 
must be very angry on you for killing the camel before the hour appointed for 
his death. Look, he even brings the camels forefathers and relatives to 
avenge his death. I suggest you should run away from here." 
  
The lion believed him and was frightened. When he saw the caravan 
approaching, with so many camels, he ran for his life. 
  
When the jackal had finally gotten rid of the lion, he ate the camel's flesh all 
by himself. It lasted many days. 
  
The wise indeed say: 
Spurn the company of the wicked; else you will come to grief. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
17. Bird and Monkey 
There lived a group of monkeys 
in the mountains. During one 
winter, there were heavy rains. 
Drenched in the rain, they began 
to shiver in the cold. 
  
During this time, some of the 
monkey found some colourful 
Gunja fruits, which appeared to 
them as embers of fire. Hoping to 
make some fire for themselves, 
they began to blow at them. 
 
  
A bird on a nearby tree was watching the monkeys from above. Considering 
the vain attempts the monkeys were busy with, it thought of advising them 
against it, "What big fools you are. You are blowing at some Gunja fruits and 
not embers of fire. You will never be able to make any fire out of them." 
 
"What you are doing is a waste of time. These fruits will not help you to 
protect yourself against the cold. Go and find some shelter instead. You may 
find a cave or a burrow where you will be protected from the rains and the 
cold winds." 
  
The monkeys did not like his advice. One of the old monkeys said, "Go fool 
yourself. Why are you interfering in our task?" 
  
But the bird disagreed. Not heeding what the old monkey had said, it flew 
down from the tree and persisted that the monkeys stop what they were 
doing. The monkey ignored his chatter but the bird refused to stop. 
  
In an effort to convince the monkeys, the bird came close to explain that their 
efforts were useless. 
  
Already frustrated by their vain efforts, the monkeys became furious. One of 
the monkeys caught hold of the bird and smashed him against the ground. 
The bird was severely wounded. 
  
The wise indeed say: 
Never give advice unless you are asked for it. 
 
  
  
 
18. Sparrow Came to Grief 
A couple of sparrows lived on 
the branches of a huge tree, 
deep in the jungle. They had 
worked very hard in building their 
nest, and it was a comfortable 
home that protected them in all 
weathers. 
  
One day, during the winter, as 
they were enjoying the comforts 
of their nest, it started raining 
outside. 
 
  
Sometime later, a monkey came to take shelter under the very same tree. 
The monkey was all drenched in the rain, and his teeth were chattering in the 
cold. 
 
When the female sparrow saw this, she felt pity on him and said from her 
nest, "O Monkey, You have hands and feet similar to humans. You can use 
them for many reasons. Why don't you make yourself a protected home?" 
 
The monkey was already suffering from the rain and the cold, and was in no 
mood for an advice. He replied, "You wicked sparrow! Why can't you keep 
your mouth shut?" 
  
But the female sparrow continued her advice. She explained how she was 
able to enjoy the comforts of her home, and how she did not suffer from either 
heat, or cold, or rain. This made the monkey very angry. 
  
The monkey thought, "What a wicked female bird! She talks as if she has 
mastered all sciences and philosophies, and simply won't stop chirping. She 
is making me so angry, that I might as well kill her. I am already suffering 
from this rain and cold, I do not wish to hear any advice." 
  
The female sparrow, however, continued chattering and did not cease to 
advice. 
  
At one moment, the monkey became so angry, that he climbed up the tree 
and tore up her nest to pieces. 
  
The wise indeed say: 
Give your advice only to those who deserve it, else you will come to 
grief.  
  
 
19. Right-Mind and Wrong-Mind 
 
Once upon a time there were two 
friends in a small village named 
Dharmabuddhi (Virtuous-Mind or 
Right-Mind) and Papabuddhi 
(Wicked-Mind or Wrong-Mind). 
One day, the wicked of the two, 
Papabuddhi, thought to himself 
that he was poor and lacked the 
knowledge to earn for himself. 
He thought of taking 
Dharmabuddhi to another 
kingdom and use his skills to 
make money. 
  
He thought, "If I can deprive him of all the earnings, I can have all the money 
for myself and live happily". 
 
After some time, he met Dharmabuddhi, "My friend, we need to earn money 
to provide for ourselves when we grow old. Let us travel to some other 
kingdom to earn money. Besides, unless we travel to far-off kingdoms, we will 
not have any stories to tell our grand-children!" 
  
Dharmabuddhi agreed to his plan, and took the blessings of his parents and 
teachers to travel to a distant kingdom. 
  
On an auspicious day, they began their journey. 
  
The two of them made a lot of money due to Dharmabuddhi's skills and 
knowledge. After some time, pleased with their earnings, they planned to 
return home. 
  
On their way to their home, as they approached their village, Papabuddhi said 
to Dharmabuddhi, "Friend, It will be improper for us to carry so much money 
home as all our friends and relatives will start requesting us money. Besides, 
there is danger of theft." 
  
He said, "Let us bury the money in the jungle, where nobody will find it, after 
taking only a nominal amount for our needs. Whenever we need some 
money, we can come back together and dig it out". 
  
  
  
 
Without doubting his intentions, Dharmabuddhi agreed. They buried most of 
the money beneath a tree and returned home with only a handful of money. 
Few days later, Papabuddhi, wrong-minded as he was, went to the jungle 
alone in the dead of the night. He uncovered all the money they had buried 
together, took out all the money, and closed the pit as it was before. He 
returned back home with all the money, and hid it. 
  
After a few days, pretending that nothing has happened, he went to meet 
Dharmabuddhi, "Friend, I have a large family and the money I had come with 
- have been spent already. Let us go together to the place we have buried our 
money to fetch some more." 
  
Dharmabuddhi agreed and together they went to the place they had buried 
their money, and dug up the pit. But they found the money was not there. 
  
Papabuddhi started beating his head, and blamed Dharmabuddhi, "It is you 
no doubt. Nobody else knew where we have buried the money. You have 
stolen all the money for yourself. If you do not give me my half of the money, I 
shall go and complain to the village elders for justice." 
  
Taken aback, Dharmabuddhi protested, "I have committed no such theft. 
Don't put the blame on me, as I am a virtuous man". 
  
And so, they started quarrelling, and visited the village elders for justice. The 
elders asked them to pledge before the Fire-God to find the truth. 
  
Papabuddhi suggested, "Before pledging before the Fire-God, we can 
request the spirit of the tree to stand witness. It was in front of a big tree that 
we had buried all the money; and it may be able to reveal to us who the thief 
is". 
  
The judges agreed, "We shall go the jungle together, and request the spirit of 
the tree to reveal the truth to us. If that fails, we will take pledge before the 
Fire-God." 
  
Papabuddhi immediately went home to his father, "I have stolen a huge 
amount of money from Dharmabuddhi, and we have taken the matter to the 
village elders. Your co-operation will save me and put the blame on 
Dharmabuddhi. Otherwise, I shall not only lose the money but face the risk of 
losing my life for stealing". 
  
His father said, "My son, tell me how I can help you so you don't have to part 
from the money". 
  
  
  
 
Papabuddhi explained, "There is a huge hollow inside the big tree where we 
had buried the money. You have to get inside the hollow before morning. 
When all of us go to the jungle as request the spirit of the tree to reveal the 
truth, you have to shout from inside that Dharmabuddhi is the real thief. I can 
handle the rest." 
  
As agreed, his father went to the jungle and hid himself in the hollow of the 
tree early next morning. 
  
After some time, accompanied by the elders of the village, both 
Dharmabuddhi and Papabuddhi led themselves to the huge tree where they 
had buried their money. 
  
Papabuddhi asked in a loud voice, "O spirit of the tree. Please tell us who the 
thief is, as we have a confrontation and the village elders have come to seek 
the truth." 
  
Immediately, Papabuddhi's father replied from inside the hollow of the tree, 
"Listen all who seek the truth. Dharmabuddhi is the thief, who has stolen all 
the money." 
  
The village elders were wonderstruck. They could not deny that the spirit of 
the tree had indeed revealed the truth. They immediately started discussing 
amongst themselves how they should punish for Dharmabuddhi's guilt. 
  
Meanwhile, when Dharmabuddhi heard the spirit of tree speak such, he 
became sure that there must be something wrong. The spirit of the tree, if it 
was so, is telling untruth. That is not possible. Having seen the hollow of the 
tree, he put a heap of dried leaves and grass in front of the hollow of the tree 
and set fire to it. 
  
When the fire started flaring up, Papabuddhi's father could not bear the heat 
and the smoke inside the hollow any longer. He came out, with burns in his 
body, crying for pity. 
  
The village elders were surprised to find him coming outside from the hollow 
of the tree, "What were you doing here? And what has happened to you?" 
  
He at once confessed his part, and explained the village elders what his son 
had done. 
  
Thus, the village elders came to know of the truth, and decided to punish 
Papabuddhi for his guilt for theft, to blame it on Dharmabuddhi and 
misleading the village elders. 
   
  
 
They decided to hang Papabuddhi on the very same tree, and praised 
Dharmabuddhi for his wit. 
  
The wise indeed say: 
Avoid the company of the wicked or you will pay a heavy price for it. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
20. Foolish Crane and Mongoose 
There was a huge Banyan tree 
beside a lake, which nested a 
number of cranes. 
  
In the hollow at the foot of the 
tree lived a poisonous black 
snake. He used to climb up and 
eat the crane's youngs after they 
were hatched. 
  
One crane, who had lost her 
children to the cunning black 
snake, started weeping on the 
banks of the lake. 
 
 
A crab, who was nearby, heard the crane weeping, and asked, "Why do you 
cry, aunty?" 
 
The crane replied, "I am the unlucky mother, all of whose children have been 
eaten by the wicked black snake, who lives in the hollow of the tree. What 
else can I do but weep? I would have killed the snake if I could!" 
  
The crab thought for a while, "I have to devise a plan to have the black snake 
killed, and have the cranes destroyed at the same time. The cranes are our 
natural enemy. I will tell him half-truth and half lies, to my advantage." 
  
Thinking so, the crab said to the crane, "Aunty! I will tell you a plan to get rid 
of the black snake. All you have to do is scatter some fish and flesh from a 
nearby burrow, where a mongoose lives, to the snake's hollow. When the 
mongoose will come following the food and reach the snake's home, he will 
certainly kill him!" 
  
The crane agreed to do as the crab planned. As anticipated, the mongoose 
saw the black snake while following the trail of food. They had a fight, and the 
mongoose killed the snake. 
  
After this, the mongoose realized that there were many cranes on the top of 
the trees. In due course of time, the mongoose climbed up the trees and 
started killing the cranes, till all the cranes were destroyed. 
  
  
  
 
The wise indeed say: 
The solution of the problem should not be worse than the problem 
itself. That is, while trying to solve the problem, you should not 
complicate the problem further. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
21. Rat that Ate Iron 
 
Jveernadhana was a merchant's 
son who was not successful. He 
faced a loss in his business and 
lost all his money. 
  
He thought of travelling to a 
different part of the country to 
seek success. 
  
He had inherited a very costly 
iron balance from his ancestors. 
When leaving, he mortgaged the 
iron balance to a nearby 
merchant in exchange of money 
for his travels. 
  
He travelled all over the country, and had a successful travel. The merchant's 
son then decided to return to his home town. 
 
After his return, he went to the nearby merchant's place and asked for his iron 
balance, "O Friend! Please return the iron balance that I had kept with you." 
  
The other merchant did not want to return it, he said, "I do not have it 
anymore. We have a problem with rats. The rats are eating up everything. 
They have eaten up your iron balance, too!" 
  
At once, the merchant's son knew the truth. He replied, "If the rats have eaten 
it up, there is nothing that you can do. Anyway, nothing can last forever!" 
  
He continued, I am eager to go for a bath in the river, please ask your boy to 
help me carry my belongings, and to look after them while I take my bath" 
  
The other merchant agreed, and called his son, "Son, this is your uncle. 
Please accompany him to the river and keep watch so that none of his 
belongings get stolen." 
  
So, the merchant's son and the boy went to river. After he had taken a bath, 
the merchant's son took the boy to a nearby cave. He kept the boy inside the 
cave and blocked the entrance of the cave with a big rock. He then returned 
to the other merchant's place. 
  
  
  
 
When the other merchant saw his friend returning alone, he asked, "Where is 
my boy? Why have you returned alone?" 
  
The merchant's son replied, "I feel sorry for you. When I was taking my bath, 
your boy was standing on the bank. Just then, a flamingo flying above swept 
down and carried your boy off in its claws. I could do nothing!" 
  
On hearing this, the other merchant got angry. He said, "You are a liar! A 
flamingo can never carry a boy as big as him, in its claws. I shall complain 
about you to the village elders." 
  
At once, the other merchant dragged the merchant's son to a nearby village 
elder and started complaining 
  
The other merchant said, "He is a disgraceful man, who has kidnapped my 
son." 
 
The village elder instructed, "How can you do this? Return his son to him 
immediately!" 
  
But the merchant's son was unmoved. He said, "There is nothing that I can 
do. A flamingo swept down and carried him off in its claws from the 
riverbank!" 
  
Hearing this, the village elder got angry. He shouted, "How can a flamingo 
carry a child? You are lying!" 
  
The merchant's son replied, "Sir! In a city where rats eat iron, why cannot a 
flamingo carry a child?" 
  
The village elder was amazed to hear this, "Where does a rat eat iron? What 
is the meaning of what you say? Please explain yourself clearly!" 
  
The merchant's son narrated the entire sequence of events to them and 
explained how he had hidden the merchant's boy in a cave to get his iron 
balance back. 
  
When the village elder, and everybody else who had crowded there heard the 
story, they started laughing. The other merchant was embarrassed. 
  
The village elder instructed the other merchant to return the iron balance to 
the merchant's son immediately, and recover his son from the cave. 
  
The wise indeed say: 
'Tit for tat' is the best policy in life. 
 
  
  
 
22. King and Foolish Monkey 
Once there was a king, who had 
a pet monkey. 
  
This monkey was a fool, but was 
treated royally and moved freely 
in the king's palace. 
 
He was also allowed to enter the 
king's personal rooms that were 
forbidden even for the 
confidential servants. 
  
One afternoon, the king was 
asleep, while the monkey kept a 
watch.  
 
  
All of a sudden, a fly came in the room and sat on the king's chest. 
 
The monkey swayed her away, but the fly would only go away for some time 
and return on the king's chest again. 
  
The monkey got very angry and excited. The foolish monkey started chasing 
the fly with a sword. 
  
As the fly sat on the king's chest again, the monkey hit the fly with all his 
might. The fly flew away unharmed, but the king was severely wounded. 
  
The wise indeed say: 
Beware of a foolish friend. He can cause you more harm than your 
enemy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
23. Thief and Brahmins 
 
There was a Brahmin in a certain 
town, who was a thief. It was 
believed that he had become a 
thief due to ill actions in his 
previous life. 
  
One day, four Brahmins arrived 
in this town from a far-off place, 
to sell some wares. They had a 
successful business and earned 
a handful of money. 
  
The thief watched them making money, and thought of stealing the money 
from them. He approached them as a friend, and soon won their confidence 
by quoting eloquently from the Holy Scriptures. He requested them to appoint 
him as their helping hand, to which they agreed. 
 
One day, the Brahmins had sold all their wares. They decided that it would 
not be proper for them to travel with all the money. So, they purchased jewels 
with all the money that they had earned. Then, they cut open their thighs and 
hid the jewels inside. With the help of a special ointment, they healed their 
cuts. 
  
In this manner, they concealed all their jewels. But, all this happened during 
the time that the thief was in service. So, he knew where they had hidden all 
their earnings. The thief wondered, "I have not got a chance to rob them till 
now. If I can accompany them when they travel homewards, I may be able to 
get a chance to steal them on the way. I can poison them on the way, and 
take away the precious jewels." 
  
Later, when they started preparing to leave, the thief started weeping. He 
said, "Dear friends, the very thought of your departure makes me sad. After 
so many days that we have been together and shared a bond of love, I will be 
left all alone after you depart. Please take me along with you." 
  
The Brahmins were moved by his emotions, and decided to take him with 
them, and the five of them started the journey. 
  
On their way, they were going through the jungle and were crossing an area 
controlled by a wild tribe. The chief of the tribe had a magical crow as his pet, 
who could foresee many things. 
   
  
 
As they came near their place, the crow screamed, "Quick! They have 
treasure! Kill them and take their treasure!" 
  
When the tribesmen heard this, they captured the five friends. They searched 
them and their belongings, even removed their clothes, but found nothing. 
  
The chief said, "You certainly have some treasure with you. The crow has 
never been wrong before. Hand over your treasure to us, or we will kill you, 
as the crow suggests. You may have eaten the treasure, and we may have to 
cut open your stomachs to recover them. Tell us the truth." 
 
The thief, who was also a Brahmin, thought, "If they kill any of them, and 
search their bodies, they will recover jewels from the body. They will not 
believe me, and kill me too! They will not find any jewel, is another matter, but 
I will die anyway." 
 
Thus, the Brahmin-thief made a firm resolution and said to the chief, "O Chief, 
you believe we have treasure hidden in our bodies. But it will be a mistake to 
kill all of us to pay for the crow's misunderstanding! I offer you myself. You 
may kill me, cut open my body to the very bones and see if you find any 
treasure." 
  
The chief agreed, and thus, the Brahmin-thief sacrificed himself. The 
tribesmen looked into every bit of his body, but found nothing. 
  
The chief was very confused; he believed that the crow must somehow have 
misunderstood. He humbly said to the remaining four Brahmins, "O travellers, 
it was a mistake to kill your friend, for he did not have any hidden treasure. I 
will not further my mistake by killing any of you. I release you from my 
captivity, please continue your journey." 
  
In this manner, the four Brahmins, and the jewels were saved and continued 
their journey. 
  
The wise indeed say: 
Better an intelligent enemy than a foolish friend. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
24. Hermit and Mouse 
There was a temple of Lord 
Shiva (God of destruction) near 
a southern city called 
Mahilaropyam. 
  
A holy sage used to live and look 
after the temple. He would visit 
the city every day for alms, and 
return in the evening for meal. 
He collected more than he 
required for himself, and would 
keep the excess in a bowl, and 
distribute it among poor workers, 
who cleaned and decorated the 
temple in return. 
 
  
A mouse, who lived in a hole in the hermitage would creep in everyday and 
steal some of the food from the bowl. When the hermit realized that a mouse 
has been stealing the food. He tried all ways to stop it. He hung the bowl as 
high as he could, and even tried to beat the mouse with a stick, but the 
mouse would find some way to reach the bowl and steal some food. 
 
One day, a mendicant came to visit the temple, and the sage. But the hermit 
was absent-minded and looked for an opportunity to hit the mouse with his 
stick, lest it come again. This made the mendicant angry, "I will not visit your 
hermitage again, for you are giving only vague and abstract replies to by 
queries. You seem to be pre-occupied with something more important than 
talking to me!" 
  
The hermit humbly explained his troubles, and how the mouse keeps stealing 
from him, somehow or the other, "This mouse would even put a cat or a 
monkey to shame, when it comes to jumping and reaching my bowl! I have 
tried everything. I keep hitting my bowl with my stick, even while talking to 
you, to save the food I keep for my workers being stolen from the mouse." 
  
The mendicant understood the hermit's troubles, and advised, "A mouse that 
jumps more than it should be, a mouse that is faster than the others, must 
have some reason for it. I am sure it must have accumulated a lot of food in 
his hole. This is the reason that the mouse feels exalted, and has the energy 
to jump so high. The mouse knows he has nothing to lose, and thus nothing 
to fear." 
   
  
 
And thus, the holy man and the mendicant concluded that if they can track 
the mouse to its hole, they will be able to reach a store of food. They decided 
to follow the tracks of the mouse the very next morning. 
  
They followed the mouse's tracks and arrived at the entrance of the hole. At 
once, they started digging with a pickaxe and uncovered a huge collection of 
food stored by the mouse, which it guarded. They collected the food and 
stored it safely in the temple. 
  
On the other hand, the mouse was very depressed on realizing the entire 
store of food that it had accumulated for so long had been lost. It felt deeply 
dejected, and lost all its confidence. 
  
The mouse had no food, and decided to jump for the bowl at nightfall. But 
when it tried to reach the bowl, it realized that it had neither the strength, nor 
the confidence to reach the bowl. 
During this time, the sage charged it with a stick. It was so depressed, that it 
was not able to react quickly, and was hit. 
 
It was not a deadly blow, but it was hurt. Somehow, it managed to escape 
and left the temple at once. It decided not to return to the temple again. 
  
The wise indeed say: 
Strike at the source of the enemy's power to destroy him. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
25. Elephants and King of Mice 
 
There was a village which was 
ruined by a strong earthquake. 
With the houses and the streets 
shattered, the villagers 
abandoned the village to settle 
elsewhere. 
  
Despite being shattered, the 
vacant houses of this village had 
become homes for a large 
number of mice. The mice found 
the place very comfortable and 
grew in numbers after some 
time. 
  
There was a lake on the outskirts of the village, where a herd of elephants 
used to visit regularly to drink water and bathe. These elephants used to 
travel through the abandoned village to reach the lake. 
 
But as the herd of elephants travelled through the abandoned village, 
everyday many mice got trampled. This posed a problem for the mice. So, the 
king of mice decided to confront the elephants and request them to act 
accordingly. 
  
Next day, as the herd of elephants approached, the king of mice met the 
elephants cordially and said, "O Sirs, we live in the ruins of this abandoned 
village and as you travel through this village, everyday many mice get 
trampled. Therefore, I request you to change your route to the lake. If you do 
so, I shall remember to return the favour in your time of need." 
  
At this the king of elephants laughed, "O king of Mice, there will be no such 
favour that we, the giant elephants, will require from you, small mice. 
However, I will honour your request and we will change the route to the lake 
from today. You will not have to worry about any danger caused by us 
anymore." 
  
The king of mice thanked the king of the elephants for his consideration, and 
the herd of elephants never entered the village anymore. 
  
After some time, the herd of elephants fell into traps set by elephant-hunters. 
Many of the elephants, including their king, got entangled in the nets. They 
struggled hard but could not set themselves free from the strong nets.  
  
 
Suddenly, the king of the elephants remembered the promise of the king of 
mice. He summoned another elephant who had not got trapped to remind the 
king of mice of his promise and plea for help on his behalf. 
  
As soon as the elephant informed the king of mice of the situation, the king of 
mice summoned all mice at once. He said, "Now is the time for us to return 
the favour of the elephants. We should go immediately" 
  
And so, the elephant brought the mice to the place where the other elephants 
had been trapped. All the mice started nibbling on the strong nets and cut 
them loose. 
  
The elephants broke loose from the nets and were grateful to be free again. 
The king of elephants thanked the king of mice for his timely help, and 
became great friends thereafter. 
  
The wise indeed say: 
Never underestimate anybody by their appearances. 
 
 
 
  
  
 
26. Shandili and Sesame Seeds 
There was a learned Brahmin, 
who lived in the outskirts of a 
city, with his wife called Shandili. 
They were a happy couple but 
they were poor. 
  
One morning, the Brahmin said 
to his wife, "Tomorrow is an 
auspicious day, there is a 
special festival. It will be a 
favourable time for alms. I shall 
visit the city, and I am sure to 
collect a lot of alms tomorrow to 
last us long." 
 
  
He continued, "At the same time, you must also invite a Brahmin, and provide 
him food and clothes. It is an auspicious day, and it will be a good deed." 
 
When the wife heard this, she said, "How come you say this? I cannot invite 
any Brahmin as we are already very poor. We have neither good food, nor 
good clothes. I cannot afford to invite any Brahmin!" 
  
But the Brahmin explained, "Dear wife, even when we have a mouthful to eat, 
we must share half of it with someone in need." 
  
After much convincing, the Brahmani agreed, "I have some sesame seeds. I 
will clean and remove their husks, and cook a tasty dish for a Brahmin." 
  
The next morning, the Brahmin left for the city as planned. After he was gone, 
his wife cleaned the sesame seeds in warm water, and carefully removed 
their husks. She then put the sesame seeds outside in the sun to dry. 
Meanwhile, she started doing her household chores. 
  
During this time, a dog came and dirtied the sesame seeds. The Brahmani 
saw it, and immediately shooed the dog away. 
  
She thought, "Fate has undone my efforts. But these sesame seeds are all 
that I have. So, I will play a trick with the neighbour. I will offer to exchange 
these cleaned, un-husked sesame seeds with some husked sesame seeds. 
They will not suspect, and fall for the offer." 
  
  
  
 
She went to her neighbour and proposed an exchange. The lady of the house 
was overwhelmed. It takes a lot if time to clean and remove the husks of the 
sesame seed. She found the offer very attractive, and offered some more 
sesame seeds in return. 
  
As they were in the middle of the exchange, the neighbour's son came out. 
He said, "Mother! Who would exchange cleaned sesame seeds with unclean 
ones? There must be some reason that she offers such lucrative offer. Please 
do not accept the exchange." 
  
When the lady heard her son's advice, she turned the offer down politely. 
  
When Shandili realized that she had failed to play the trick on her neighbour, 
she returned home. 
  
The wise indeed say: 
When someone offers you something that is too good to be true, don't 
be carried away by it - Think and analyse. 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
27. Story of Merchant's Son 
 
Sagardatta was a merchant who 
had a handsome young son. 
  
One day, he observed that his 
young son had bought a costly 
book. But the book contained 
only one verse: "You get what is 
destined for you!" 
  
When the merchant realized that 
his son was a fool to buy a book 
with so much cost, but only one 
verse, he grew very angry. He 
said, "How can you do well in 
business, when you can buy a 
book which contains only one 
verse! Get out of my house, and 
never show me your face again!" 
  
The young man was utterly dejected for being driven out by his father; he 
started travelling with only his book along with him. He learnt the verse well, 
and kept repeating it, all the way. 
  
On his way, he arrived in a village. The villagers asked him his name and he 
replied from the book, "You get what is destined for you" 
  
Thus, the young man became known as 'You-get-what-is-destined-for-you'. 
  
One day, the princess of the country visited a festival and saw a handsome 
prince, who was also attending the festival. She fell in love immediately and 
asked her attendant to find a way to send a message to the handsome 
prince. 
  
She wrote a note, and gave it to her attendant. The attendant gave the note 
to the young merchant's son by mistake. He read that she wrote, "I have 
fallen in love with you, the very moment I have set my eyes on you. Please 
meet me in the castle. You will find a rope hanging from one of the windows, 
which will lead you to my room." 
  
 
  
  
 
He thought, "I will honour the wishes of the princess to meet me in person."  
 
When he climbed up the rope, and entered the princess's room, it was very 
dark. The princess thought he was the prince at the festival, and received him 
warmly. She served him food and drink, and entertained him in every manner. 
  
She said, "I have deeply fallen in love with you. I shall have no other man as 
my husband, except for you. Please tell me what you have in your mind." 
  
The merchant's son replied, "You get what is destined for you" 
  
She was surprised to hear the prince speak so, and immediately enlightened 
her room. She got furious when she realized he was not the handsome 
prince, she thought him to be, and ordered him out of her room. 
  
The young man was sad on being treated in such manner without being at 
fault, and walked to a nearby temple. He decided to spend the night there, 
and fell asleep. 
  
The temple remained un-inhabitated and the night watchman carried out 
tasks of ill-repute during the night. He wanted the young man to leave and 
said, "This temple is old and broken. You may sleep in my home." 
  
Thus, the young man went to his house. But he made a mistake and got into 
the wrong room, where the watchman's daughter was waiting for her lover to 
arrive during her father's absence. 
  
In the darkness of the night, the watchman's daughter mistook him for her 
lover and exchanged garlands in front of the picture of God. Thus, according 
to traditions they got married. 
  
The young man said, "You get what is destined for you". When she heard 
this, she realized she had done a mistake, and thought, "Such mistake is 
bound to happen, when you rush into doing something without thinking 
sufficiently about it!" She cursed him and threw him out of the house. 
  
Saddened for being treated in such manner without being at fault, he was 
walking slowly, when he saw a marriage procession approaching. 
  
They had magnificent clothes, and wore precious jewels. He followed the 
groom's procession, which was going to the bride's home, where a lavish 
ceremony was arranged. 
  
  
  
 
All of a sudden, a mad elephant rushed towards the procession, and 
everybody ran helter-skelter. The bride stood there in the middle of the 
turmoil, too afraid to run. 
  
When he saw this, the young man got hold of a huge nail, and jabbed it into 
the elephant. The elephant got frightened and ran away. 
  
After a while, when the bride's friends and relatives returned, she said, "At the 
moment when my life was in danger, there was none to help me except for 
this courageous stranger. I will marry none other than him. This is my firm 
resolution." 
  
The groom's friends and relatives were offended by these words, and there 
was a heated argument. 
  
When the words reached around, the king had to come himself to pacify 
everybody and stop the argument. Everyone including the princess and the 
watchman's daughter came to the place. 
  
The king asked the young man, "You were present in the ceremony. You 
saved the would-be bride and everybody from the elephant, it is said. I ask 
you to explain the whole thing to me!" 
  
All the young man said was, "You get what is destined for you". The princess 
and the watchman's daughter were embarrassed to hear the words. 
  
When the king heard this and saw the princess and the watchman's daughter 
blushing, he demanded to know the truth. 
  
The night watchman's daughter confessed of marrying him by mistake, and 
said, "It was my destiny, and I do not repent it!" 
  
The princess explained to the king that she had spent time with him by 
mistake, and said, "It was my destiny, and I do not regret it!" 
  
On hearing them, the bride confronted the king and said, "O King, what 
destiny has given to me, none can take away from me!" 
  
After hearing everybody and consulting his ministers, the king arranged for a 
ceremony. He gifted the young merchant's son with a thousand villages, apart 
from ornaments and golds. He married the young man with his young 
princess, and made him his heir to the throne. 
  
  
  
 
The bride-in-waiting, and the watchman's daughter were also married to him, 
by their respective parents, in the same ceremony. 
  
When he built his own castle, he arranged for his parents and relatives to be 
brought to his place, and they all lived happily ever after. 
  
The wise indeed say: 
Do your best but leave it to destiny. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
28. Unlucky Weaver 
Once, there lived a cloth-weaver 
called Somilaka, who wove very 
exquisite clothes that served only 
kings and princes. However, he 
earned very less and could 
hardly afford to live. 
  
Other weavers in the locality 
were rich, despite the fact that 
they weaved much inferior 
clothes. 
  
One day, he said to his wife, "My 
dear, this place does not deserve 
me! I weave superior clothes, 
and yet I earn so little. On the 
other hand, the other weavers 
grow richer by the day with their 
inferior clothes. I shall seek my 
success somewhere else." 
 
  
His wife, however, did not want to leave, for there was no assurance of 
betterment somewhere else. But the weaver had made up his mind, and left 
the place in search of better prospects. 
  
He went to another city, where he indeed was successful. His clothes 
became popular for the high quality, and in three years he had saved three 
hundred coins of gold. Now that he was rich, he decided to return home to his 
hometown and his wife. 
  
During his journey, in the middle of the jungle, he heard two voices: 
Destiny: "Action, you should not have let the weaver earn three hundred 
coins of gold. He does not require that much for his living!" 
 
Action: "Destiny, I had to reward him according to his efforts, but you may 
decide how much he should retain!" 
  
He checked into his bag to find that the gold coins were lost. He became very 
sad. He thought, "I will not be able to face my wife! All my efforts for the last 
three years have been lost." 
  
  
  
 
So, he discontinued his journey, and returned to the city. He worked very 
hard, and within a year, earned five hundred gold coins. Now that he was rich 
again, he decided to return home to his wife. 
  
During his journey, in the middle of the jungle, he heard the two voices again: 
Destiny: "Action, you should not have let the weaver earn five hundred coins 
of gold. He does not require that much for his living!" 
 
Action: "Destiny, I had to reward him according to his efforts, but you may 
decide how much he should retain!" 
  
When he heard this, remembering the last time, he quickly checked into the 
bag and found that the gold coins were missing. He became very sad, and 
wished he died. 
  
He sat down and thought, "There is no point in living. I have lost my money 
again, and cannot face my wife in this state of poverty! I shall hang myself on 
a tree!" 
  
He wove a rope from the nearby grass, and tied it in a Banyan tree. He made 
a noose around his neck. 
  
Just as he was about to hang himself, he heard a voice from heaven, "I am 
Destiny! I have taken the gold coins from you as you did not need the money 
for your living. But I am pleased with your industrious deeds. I permit you to 
ask for a boon that I shall grant." 
 
Somilaka replied, "Please give a lot of gold coins, which is the only boon that 
I ask you to grant" 
  
Destiny asked, "You are not destined to earn more than you need for a living. 
Why do you ask for the money that you cannot enjoy?" 
  
But the weaver was adamant. So, the wish was granted, "I shall grant you 
your wish, but you must return back to the city and visit any two merchant's 
house. Study their behaviour and let me know how you would like your 
money to be" 
  
So, he discontinued his journey once again, and returned to the city. He went 
into a merchant's house, and was greeted as a guest according to local 
traditions. 
  
This merchant was very rich, but did not like this unwanted guest. They gave 
him food in the most insulting manner, and offered a dirty bed for the night. 
   
  
 
At night, he heard the two voices again: 
Destiny: "Action, you should not have let the merchant provide food to the 
weaver. He has forced himself as an unwanted guest!" 
 
Action: "Destiny, the weaver needed to be provided for the night, and the 
merchant did so in his miserly ways, but you may decide the outcome!" 
  
Next morning, he went into another merchant's house, where he was warmly 
welcomed. He was provided with new clothes and water to bathe. He was 
then served a lavish dinner, and a comfortable bed to sleep in. During his 
stay, he realized that the second merchant was not rich. 
  
At night, he heard the two voices again: 
Destiny: "Action, you should not have let the merchant provide entertain the 
weaver so extravagantly. He has forced himself as an unwanted guest!" 
 
Action: "Destiny, the weaver needed to be provided for the night, and the 
merchant did so in his generous ways, but you may decide the outcome!" 
  
Next morning, the weaver watched the king's servants bring money for the 
second merchant. Destiny had rewarded him for his good deeds. 
  
The weaver thought, "The second merchant is not rich, but he leads a life 
which is better than the first merchant, who is very rich" 
  
On his way homewards, the voice from heaven asked, "How do you want 
your money to be?" 
  
The weaver at once said, "Please give me only the money that I will be able 
to enjoy to the fullest like the second merchant." 
  
His wish was granted, and Somilaka returned home with some money that 
made his wife happy. They lived happily, and were content with whatever 
they earned. 
  
The wise indeed say: 
Action and destiny are two sides of a coin. Work with all your might but 
leave it to destiny. And stay happy and content. 
 
 
  
  
 
29. Crows and Owls 
 
Once upon a time, all the birds - 
the swans, cranes, parrots, 
cuckoos, owls, peacocks, doves 
and the rest of them - decided to 
meet. They had to discuss a 
subject of most importance. 
Unfortunately, no crow had joined 
yet, but they could not wait any 
longer. 
  
They debated, "Garuda, who is 
the king of all birds, is always 
busy in serving his master. He 
has neither the time, nor the 
interest to bother about us! There 
is no point in having a king who 
does not protect and remains at 
the position of the king only as a 
namesake." 
 
And so the birds discussed, "Let us choose a king amongst us!" 
 
On this, they started looking at each other; suddenly the features of owl 
attracted everybody. He was powerful, had impressive features, and most 
importantly he could see at night, when they were most unsafe. They agreed 
that the owl would be an apt king for themselves. 
  
They shouted, "The owl should be our king! Let us prepare for the coronation 
at once!" 
  
As decided, the birds collected 108 holy roots, water from the holy rivers, and 
prepared a lavish and highly decorated throne. They even spread the ground 
in front of the throne with tiger skin. The Brahmins, they had invited, started 
chanting from holy books, while the birds beat drums, and beautiful maidens 
blew conches and sang songs of joy. With a map of all the continents and 
oceans drawn, the owl was prepared to be crowned. 
  
At the moment the owl was being accompanied to the throne to be crowned, 
a crow arrived. He asked curiously, "Please let me know the reason of this 
great gathering, and lavish celebration!" 
  
  
  
 
The crow was indeed known for his smartness, and the birds decided to 
explain and take his opinion. 
  
The birds explained, "O Crow, Garuda has no time to bother about us. So, we 
have decided to denounce him as our king and have elected the owl to be our 
new king. Since, you have just joined, please provide us with your opinion 
also." 
  
The crow smiled and replied, "In my opinion, I should advise against crowning 
the owl as our king!" 
  
He continued to explain, "The owl is blind by the day. And look at him. Why 
have an ugly king, when the birds are known for their beauty. We have the 
peacocks, swans, nightingales, pigeons and so many more who look so 
beautiful. And look at him, he looks so cruel with his crooked nose and squint 
eyes. How would he look if he was angry? I certainly advise against crowning 
him." 
  
The other birds started considering his points, and the crow continues with his 
arguments, "And what do we gain from electing him as our king? We already 
have Garuda as our king. The mere mention of his name would keep our 
enemies away! It is not necessary at all, for us to elect a new king and 
denounce Garuda!" 
  
On hearing his logic, the birds started pondering, "His arguments are right. 
The entire reason of our meeting serves no purpose. Let us think awhile and 
meet some other time." 
  
One by one, the birds started flying away. Even the Brahmins and beautiful 
maidens started to leave. The crow was still sitting on the branch of a tree. 
Unable to understand the commotion, the owl and his wife were still waiting to 
be crowned king and queen. 
 
The owl asked his wife, "What is happening? Why is the crowning ceremony 
yet to begin? Why have all the birds left?" 
  
His wife replied, "As I understand, the crow put an obstacle in the crowning 
ceremony. He persuaded all the other birds to fly away. Only he, with ulterior 
motives, stayed behind. We should return home, too." 
  
On hearing this, the owl got very disappointed. He shouted to the crow, "You 
are a wicked bird. I did not harm you in any way, and yet you put obstacle to 
my crowning ceremony. From today, I end all friendly relationship with you. 
From now onwards, our kind and your kind will be nothing but enemies." 
  
  
  
 
The owl left with his wife, to return to his home. The crow was left alone. 
  
With everybody else gone, he decided to leave too. While flying off, he 
thought, "Why did I speak my mind? My advice to the birds was not required. 
It is because of my advice, that crows will always have the mighty owls as 
their enemies." 
  
The wise indeed say: 
Keep your counsel to yourself and thus stay away from trouble. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
30. Elephants and Hares 
Deep in the jungle, there lived a 
big group of elephants. The 
elephants lived in a certain place 
beside a pond, and did not 
require venturing out. 
  
There came a time, when the 
pond started drying up due to 
lack of rain for a few years. 
  
Some of the elephants met the 
king of the elephants, and said, 
"Your Majesty! We do not have 
any more water. Some of our 
little ones are on the verge of 
death. We must find some other 
place which has abundant 
water." 
 
  
After thinking a while, the elephant king said, "I remember knowing a place 
where there is a very big lake. It must still be full of water. Let us go there." 
  
Next morning they started to march. After travelling for five days and five 
nights, the elephants finally reached the place. There was indeed a big lake, 
full of water. 
  
There were innumerable holes in the soft earth around the lake, in which a 
group of hares lived. 
  
When the elephants saw so much water in the lake, they rejoiced, and started 
jumping into the water without a care in the world. 
  
All this sudden commotion caused the holes to be destroyed. Many hares 
were trampled under the elephants. While many died, many others were 
seriously injured. But the hares could do nothing to stop this misery, and 
those who ran away could save themselves. 
  
When the elephants left in the evening, the hares that had run away started 
returning. They assembled in sorrow, "Oh dear! Because of scarcity of water 
everywhere else, the elephants will come here every day. We must think of 
something, or more of us will get trampled tomorrow. What can we do against 
the mighty elephants? We must leave this place to survive."  
  
 
One of the hares disagreed, "Friends! This is our ancestral home. If we can 
frighten the elephants off, they will not return. I can think of a way to frighten 
them away. We may be only small hares, but we are capable of executing my 
plan." 
  
As planned, a hare sat on a hillock which was on the path of the elephants. 
After a while the king of the elephants came with the rest of his herd. The 
hare shouted, "You wicked elephant! I prohibit you to enter the lake. This lake 
belongs to the Moon-God. Go back at once!" 
  
The king of the elephants was taken aback. But he would not dare to enrage 
any God either. He asked what message the hare had for him. 
  
The hare said, "I am the messenger of the Moon God. He has sent me to 
inform you that he forbids you from entering his lake. Yesterday, many hares 
were trampled due to your visit. The hares live under the protection of the 
Moon God, and he is very angry with you. If you wish to survive, you should 
not enter the lake again." 
 
The elephant king kept quiet for some time, and then said, "If that is so. Tell 
me where your Moon-God is, and I will go away with my herd, once we have 
asked for his forgiveness." 
  
It was already evening, so the hare said, "The Moon God has come down to 
his lake to console the families of the hares who got killed yesterday. If you 
want to meet him, come with me!" 
  
The clever hare led the king of the elephant to the bank of the lake from 
where the reflection of the moon could be seen in the water. He said, "He is 
very aggrieved today, please bow to him silently and leave. You must not 
disturb his meditation. Otherwise, he will be furious." 
  
The king of the elephant was wonder-struck on seeing the moon in the water. 
He believed the hare, and left trembling as soon as he bowed respectfully. 
And so, the hares lived happily, without being disturbed by the elephants 
anymore. 
  
The wise indeed say: 
The weak must make use of all tactics to survive. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
31. Cunning Mediator 
 
Two partridges (quail-like birds) 
lived in a certain tree in the 
jungle. While one of them lived 
on the branches, the other lived 
inside a hole at the foot of the 
tree. 
  
They became good friends, and 
they would spend long hours with 
each other telling each other 
stories and events of their lives. 
In this manner, the partridges 
spent their time in happiness. 
  
One day, one of them went away with some more partidges in search of food. 
 
As was usual, when he did not return back even at sunset, the other partridge 
started worrying. He thought, "He has not done this ever. Why has the 
partridge not returned home today? Has been trapped by some hunter? Or 
maybe even killed? I cannot live without him. I am certain there is some 
reason why he has not returned even at nightfall." 
  
He did not return even the next day, or the day after. For several days, the 
partridge kept worrying, and then gave up hope of his friend's return. "And so, 
I spent several days worrying. 
  
On nightfall, a hare came to the tree and observing an empty hole at the foot 
of the tree, took shelter inside. Since, the partridge had given up hope, he did 
not object to the hole being occupied by the hare. 
  
After a few days the partridge returned. He had gone to a place where there 
was plenty of food to eat. He had grown fat, but remembering his dear friend, 
he thought of returning. 
  
On his return, when he found that a hare had taken over his house, he 
objected strongly, "Hare! This hole is my home, and you have taken over 
during my absence. This is very unfair of you. I demand you to leave 
immediately". 
  
 
  
  
 
The hare disagreed, "This place is mine now. I am not leaving. I found this 
hole empty, and therefore made it my home". Thus, they began to quarrel. 
  
The partridge understood there was no point in quarrelling with the hare, and 
said, "Hare! You seem to lack the basic ethics. Let us approach someone 
holy and knowledgeable. Let someone well-versed in holy books decide who 
is right, and thus, who shall have the right to occupy the hole." 
  
The hare agreed, and as suggested they went to look for a holy man to settle 
their dispute. 
  
Meanwhile, a wild tomcat became aware that they wanted to settle their 
dispute through a holy man. He quickly posed as a learned animal. He held a 
blade of holy Kusha grass in his paw and stood on the bank of a river, where 
he will be quickly spotted. 
  
Standing on his hind legs, with his eyes closed, he started chanting. 
  
When the partridge and the hare came across him, the hare said, "He looks 
holy, and a learned person. Let us go and seek his advice." 
  
The partridge agreed but said, "Yes, let us seek his opinion. But he is a wild 
cat by birth, and a natural enemy for both of us. We should be careful, and 
speak only from a distance." 
  
As decided, they came to the wild tomcat, but stood at a distance, "Holy 
person! We have a dispute amongst us. Will you please settle our dispute 
and advise us who is right in accordance to Holy Scriptures. If you decide that 
one of us has sinned, you may as well eat him!" 
  
The tomcat replied, "O my friends, I have denounced the violent life as it 
leads to hell. Non-violence is the very essence of true religion. I shall not 
harm any of you. However, I will hear both of you and settle your dispute with 
the knowledge I have gained." 
  
Both the partridge and the hare were impressed. The wild tomcat continued, 
"But I am old, and cannot hear you from that distance. Fear not! I do not even 
harm lice, bug or a mosquito. Come close, and explain the reason of your 
dispute. I shall make the most just settlement." 
  
With all these sayings, he won the confidence of both of them. Both the 
partridge and the hare came near him and sat close to him to explain the 
reason of their dispute. 
  
  
  
 
This was the very opportunity that the tomcat was looking for. As soon as 
they sat beside him, he jumped and seized one of them in his teeth and the 
other with his claws. He killed both of them and made a meal out of them. 
  
The wise indeed say: 
Beware of a rascal who pretends to be holy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
32. Brahmin and Crooks 
In a small village, there lived a 
Brahmin, by the name of Mitra 
Sharma. He was a worshipper of 
Fire-God. One day, during 
monsoons, when the sky was 
overcast with cloud, he decided 
to conduct a certain sacrificial 
ritual. 
  
The Brahmin travelled to a 
nearby village, to visit a devotee, 
to request for a goat that he will 
offer it as a sacrifice to the 
Gods. 
 
  
On his arrival, he requested the devotee, "Son, I want to perform a sacrificial 
ritual on this auspicious time. Please offer me with a well-fed goat." 
 
The devotee agreed and offered him with one of his best goats. 
  
The Brahmin started his journey homewards. He carried the goat on his 
shoulders, so that he did not have problems in controlling the animal on the 
way home. 
  
On his way home, three crooks watched him from a distance. They were 
almost starving, and the Brahmin had a goat and he was all alone. 
  
They discussed, "We will be saved from the fangs of hunger in this cold 
monsoon, if we can lay our hands on this goat that the Brahmin is carrying." 
  
They decided to trick the Brahmin, in order to gain the goat for themselves. 
  
As planned, the first of the crooks stood in the Brahmin's path, by taking a 
shorter road. 
  
When the Brahmin, with the goat on his shoulders, approached him, he 
queried, "Ho Brahmin, Why is it that you behave so ridiculously?" 
  
"Why on earth are you carrying a profane dog on your shoulders?" 
  
  
  
 
On hearing this, the Brahmin got angry, he replied, "How can you not see any 
difference between a goat and a dog? Are you blind? Can't you see I am 
carrying a sacrificial goat?" 
  
The crook had played his part, and replied, "Please don't get angry on me. 
You may have it anyway you want. Please carry on with your journey". 
  
A little further, he was approached by the second crook, who said, "Ho 
Brahmin, shame on you! How can you carry this dead calf on your shoulders 
like that? Shame on you!" 
  
The Brahmin got even angrier, "Are you blind? Can't you see it is a goat and 
not a dead calf?" 
  
To this the second crook replied, "Have it anyway you want it to be, please 
don't get angry on me." 
  
When the Brahmin had gone a little further, the third crook accosted him, "Ho 
Brahmin. This is highly improper for you do something like this. Why do you 
carry a donkey on your shoulders? Put him down, before anyone sees you 
doing this!" 
  
Now, the Brahmin started thinking how can three different persons not see 
that was carrying a goat? He thought that he must be carrying a goblin, which 
is changing shape all the while. 
  
Fearing so, he put the goat down on the ground and ran home terrified. 
  
The crooks had succeeded in their plan. The crooks caught the goat at once, 
and feasted on the goat to their heart's content. 
  
The wise indeed say: 
Untruth spoken repeatedly appears to be truth. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
33. Dove and Hunter 
 
There was a mean hunter, who 
used to roam in the jungle in 
search of birds and other small 
animals. He looked like Yama 
(the God of death), and was so 
heartless that he was deserted by 
all his friends and relatives for his 
cruel deeds. 
  
In the very same jungle, there 
lived a happy couple of doves. 
They had built a beautiful nest in 
the top of a big tree. 
  
One evening, the hunter caught hold of the female dove when she was alone, 
and trapped her into a cage. He was looking for more hunting, when a 
sudden storm broke in. It was accompanied by heavy rains. 
 
Terrified, he began searching for shelter from the rain and the gusty wind. He 
could not find any shelter, but luckily found a big tree. Shivering in rain and 
cold, he took shelter under the tree. 
  
This happened to be the very tree where the female dove he had caught 
lived. 
  
After some time, the rain started to cease and the sky started to clear. But it 
was late into the night, so the hunter decided to spend the night under the 
tree. 
  
He prayed, "O spirit of the tree, or whoever lives here, I take shelter under 
this tree for the night. I am drenched in the rains, and suffer from cold and 
hunger. Please protect me for the night." 
  
Meanwhile, in the nest above, the male dove was very worried as his wife 
had not returned. The fact that there was a storm even compounded his 
worries. He said, "I am so sad and worried that my wife has not returned. Our 
home seems empty without her. I am worried because the wind blows so 
fiercely, and it is already late in the night." 
  
The female dove could hear her husband worrying from above, and she 
called out to him. 
   
  
 
The female dove said, "I am being held by the hunter who has taken shelter 
under the very tree. But I will tell you something that will be for your own 
good." 
  
She continued, "The guest is always God. If someone ever comes to your 
house for shelter, one must do his best to him, even risking own life. This 
hunter is cold and hungry. Don't hate him because he has caged me. Instead, 
welcome him because he seeks refugee for the night under your protection." 
  
She explained, "This hunter is not to be blamed that I have been caged by 
him. But this must be the result of my past deeds. Grievances like poverty, 
disease, imprisonment and even disaster come to own's life as a result of 
one's own deeds. Thus, speaks our religion. Please welcome him according 
to our traditions, and not hate him for me." 
  
The male dove was touched by his wife's virtuous guidance, and he flew 
down and approached the hunter with warmth. He said, "O friend! Welcome 
to our tree. Please don't worry about anything and stay in this place as long 
as you want. Please tell me how I can be of assistance to you." 
  
The hunter was relieved to have a friend. He said, "O dove, please do 
something to help me from this terrible cold." 
  
The dove at once flew to a distant place and brought back a piece of burning 
coal. He then climbed up the tree and dropped some dry leaves. The leaves 
caught fire. 
  
He said to the hunter, "Please warm yourself from this fire. I am already 
unfortunate for not being able to provide food to relieve you of your hunger. 
As you are my guest, I offer myself. Please accept my sacrifice and make a 
meal out of me." 
  
Saying so, he flew into the fire, which killed him. 
  
The hunter was very hungry, and could not refuse to accept his offer. At the 
same time, he was moved by such warmth. His heart was filled with pity. He 
said, "A man who is wicked always has a troubled mind. And he ultimately 
pays for his evil actions. I am certain to go to hell, for the cruel misdeeds I 
have done for so long. But this dove has set a virtuous example, and taught 
me a lesson of sacrifice." 
  
He said, "I will lead a life of discipline and well-being from today. I promise to 
sacrifice all my lavish unwanted pleasures." 
  
  
  
 
With this, he threw away his cage, which broke and released the unfortunate 
female dove. 
  
When the female dove realized that her husband was already dead and was 
burning in the fire, she began to wail, "What good is my life without you. I 
have lost all interest in life" 
  
Saying so, she flew into the flames, which got her killed too. 
  
After her death, she met her husband in heaven. He was transformed into a 
divine creature, riding a chariot in costly ornaments. The female dove 
realized, she had assumed a divine form, too. 
  
As for the hunter, he renounced his life as a hunter and converted into a 
sage. One day, when he saw a wild forest fire, he decided to sacrifice his life 
to regret his past deeds. 
  
He, thus, paid for his sins and was relieved of his sins. He went to heaven 
with great joy. 
  
The wise indeed say: 
Self-sacrifice is the highest stage of sacrifice. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
34. Brahmin and Cobra 
There was a Brahmin called 
Haridatta who had a farm in a 
certain town. He was hard-
working. But despite his hard 
work on his farm, his farm did 
not produce enough for him to 
prosper. 
  
One day, while working in the 
farm, he could not bear the heat 
anymore and decided to rest 
under the shade of a tree in his 
farm. Beside the tree, there was 
an anthill. While he was resting 
there, a cobra emerged from the 
anthill with his hood raised. 
 
  
Observing this, he thought, "This cobra must be the deity of the farm. From 
today, I will worship and offer oblations to the cobra. Perhaps, the cobra will 
bless the farm with a rich produce." 
  
The Brahmin brought milk on a plate and offered it in front of the anthill and 
said, "I was not aware of your presence, O protector of my farm, please 
forgive me and accept my offering." 
  
As was the tradition, he went home after he made the offering. The next day, 
when he came to the anthill, he saw a gold coin on the plate he had offered 
milk in. He accepted the gold coin as a blessing from the cobra. 
  
This went on for a long time. Every day, the Brahmin would offer milk to the 
cobra and received a gold coin in the plate he offered the milk in. He started 
growing rich. 
  
After some time, the Brahmin needed to visit another village. In order that the 
worship of the cobra was not hampered, he instructed his son to offer milk to 
the cobra every day, and keep the blessing the cobra gives in return. 
  
Following his instructions, the Brahmin's son did offer milk to the cobra in due 
time and went home. When he returned next day, he was astonished to find a 
gold coin lying in the plate. 
  
  
  
 
He thought, "If the cobra gives a gold coin every day, there must be lots of 
gold coins inside the anthill. I can take out all the gold coins if I kill the cobra." 
  
The next morning, instead of offering milk, the Brahmin's son waited for the 
cobra to emerge from the anthill and hit the cobra with a stick in an attempt to 
kill him. The cobra fought back angrily as it was not a deadly blow, and bit the 
Brahmin's son. He died from the poison, and his body was cremated in the 
very farm by their relatives. 
  
When the Brahmin returned, he heard what had happened and that his son 
had died. His relatives wanted to kill the cobra for revenge. 
  
The Brahmin was indeed aggrieved for his son's death, but did not favour his 
behaviour that led to his death. He did not blame the cobra, and defended the 
cobra's action. 
  
The next morning, the Brahmin went to offer milk to the cobra as usual. He 
stood near the anthill and started praying. On hearing this, the cobra came 
out of the anthill and confronted him. 
 
The cobra said, "Look at yourself. You have even forgotten your son's death 
and have come here out of the greed for a gold coin! You do not come here 
out of respect, but for greed. Our friendship cannot last any longer now". 
  
The cobra continued, "I bit your son in retaliation to his attack. He got greedy 
for gold and died. What he did was out of his youthful rashness, but how can 
you forget his death? Take a look at the funeral pyre, and take a look at my 
injured hood." 
  
The cobra gifted the Brahmin with a diamond this time, and said, "Shattered 
love cannot be restored with a display of affection. Never come here again!" 
  
The Brahmin went home with the diamond, and grieved his son's foolishness 
and his death, and did not return to the cobra again. 
  
The wise indeed say: 
Greed crosses all borders of reasoning and ends in disaster. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
35. Old Man, Young Wife and Thief 
 
There lived an old but rich 
merchant named Kamatura, who 
was a widower. 
  
Ever since his wife had died, he 
was love-sick and wanted to re-
marry. He somehow convinced 
another merchant, and gave him 
a lot of money, to marry his 
young daughter. 
  
The young wife was very 
unhappy with the marriage, and 
hated her husband because he 
was an old man. She did not 
even look at her husband. 
 
The old merchant understood her reason for being unhappy, but would do 
everything to impress her. 
 
One night, as they were sleeping on opposite sides of the bed, a thief crept 
into their house. The new wife awoke by a sound, and realized that there was 
a thief inside the house. 
  
The young wife was terrified, and turned to her husband who was sleeping. 
Out of fear, she clasped her husband tightly. She did all this without making 
any sound, so that the thief's attention is not drawn. 
  
The old merchant awoke, to find his young wife hugging him. He thought, "I 
am very delighted at this, but there must be a reason that my wife hugs me so 
tightly." 
  
As he glanced around, he realized that there was a thief in their house, and 
his wife was hugging him out of fear of the thief. 
  
He shouted at the thief, "O stranger, I want to thank you! I have tried 
everything, but my wife kept avoiding me. But, it is because of you that she 
hugged me so lovingly. I am a happy man now, please take anything you 
like." 
  
The wise indeed say: 
Sometimes, even your enemy can be beneficial to you. 
  
  
 
36. Brahmin, Thief and Demon 
In a certain town, there lived a 
Brahmin who denounced all 
luxuries of life. His name was 
Drona, and he did not wear fine 
clothes, or use perfumes, or 
practice any lavish means. 
  
He followed rigorous practices 
of worship even during cold, hot 
and rainy seasons. Due to this, 
his body had become lean and 
weak. His hair and nails also 
grew long due to his absence of 
maintaining them.  
 
  
One of his devotees gifted him with a pair of calves. He took great care of the 
calves and fed them properly. In due time, they grew enviable fat. 
 
One day, a thief noticed the calves and thought, "I shall steal these fat calves 
from him." 
  
He planned and returned with a rope to steal the calves in night. On his way, 
he met a demon with a very hideous appearance. 
  
The thief was frightened on seeing him and asked, "Who are you?" 
  
The demon replied, "I am a demon. I always speak the truth and hate liars. 
Introduce yourself!" 
  
The thief confessed, "I am a thief and I am on my way to steal two calves 
from a devoted Brahmin". 
  
The demon and the thief struck a friendship as they were both truthful to each 
other, and they planned that the demon can eat the Brahmin, and the thief 
can steal the calves. Their works will be accomplished in the same place, so 
they went together. 
  
The slipped inside the Brahmin's home and hid themselves. They waited for 
the Brahmin to fall asleep, when they would get the opportunity to accomplish 
their works. 
  
  
  
 
As soon as the Brahmin fell asleep, the demon came out of hiding and 
readied his teeth and nails to eat him. 
  
Fearing that his purpose will be defeated if the Brahmin wakes up when the 
demon goes to eat him, he asked the demon to wait till he tied the calves with 
his rope and left. 
  
But the demon disagreed, that if the calves started moo-ing when the thief 
was stealing them, the Brahmin may escape upon waking up, and his 
purpose will get defeated. 
  
They got into an argument due to this, and the noise of their argument woke 
the Brahmin up. 
  
The thief complained to the Brahmin that the demon was planning of eating 
him up. On this, the demon also complained to the Brahmin that the thief was 
planning to steal the calves from him. 
  
The Brahmin at once started praying chants. Hearing this, the demon ran off. 
Then the Brahmin took out a stick and chased away the thief. 
  
The wise indeed say: 
When thieves fall out, you stand to benefit. 
 
 
  
  
 
37. Tale of Two Snakes 
 
There was a king called 
Devashakti who was very 
frustrated on his son, who was 
very lean and weak. He grew 
leaner and weaker every day. 
  
Well-known physicians from far 
off places could not cure him, 
because there was a snake 
inside his stomach. They tried all 
sorts of treatments, but in vain. 
  
 
  
The young prince was also frustrated to see his father sad for him, and he 
was fed-up with his life. One night, he crept outside the palace and went to 
another kingdom. He started living in a temple, and ate from whatever alms 
he collected from kind people. 
 
This new country was ruled by a king, who had two young daughters. They 
were raised with the best of learning. Every morning they would bow at their 
father's feet to seek his blessings. 
  
One of the daughters said, "O Father, all joys of the world is bestowed upon 
us, with your blessings", and the other daughter would say, "O King, one only 
gets the fruits that are destined for one's actions!". 
  
The comments of the second daughter made the king very angry and one 
day, he summoned his ministers, "Let her enjoy the fruits that are destined for 
her actions! Take her and marry her off to anybody you meet outside the 
palace." 
  
The ministers did so, and were unable to find anybody when they saw the 
young prince who was living in the temple. The two were married. 
  
The princess was a religious girl, and considered her husband as her God. 
She was very happy and content with the marriage. They decided to travel to 
a different part of the country, as it would be improper for them to make the 
temple as their home. 
  
  
  
 
On the way, the prince became tired and wanted to rest under the shade of a 
tree. He was getting weaker every day, and could not walk long distances. 
The princess decided to buy some food from a nearby market. 
  
When she returned, she saw her husband fast asleep and a snake emerging 
from an anthill nearby. As she was about to caution, she saw another snake 
emerging from her husband's mouth. She hid herself, to keep a watch. 
  
The snake from the anthill said to the other snake, "Why do you torture this 
handsome prince? You risk your own life, too. If the prince drinks soup of 
cumin seeds and mustard, you would die for sure!" 
  
The snake from the prince's mouth said, "Why do you guard two pots of gold 
which you do not have any need of? You risk your life, too. If someone pours 
hot water and oil on the anthill, you would die for sure!" 
 
After a heated argument, they went inside their respective places, but the 
princess had already known their secrets. 
  
She acted accordingly and fed her husband with a soup of cumin seeds and 
mustard. Within hours, the young prince began to recover and regained much 
strength. After that, they poured hot water and oil on the anthill, and dug out 
the two pots of gold that the snake was guarding. 
  
Now, that the young prince had started recovering, and they had two pot full 
of gold, they lived happily ever after. 
  
The wise indeed say: 
When your enemies quarrel, you are the winner. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
38. Wedding of Mouse 
There was a beautiful hermitage 
on the bank of river Ganges, 
where a group of hermits lived in 
peace. 
  
The hermits were disciples of a 
Guru Yadnyavalkya, who was 
always absorbed in meditation, 
and followed rigorous self-
discipline. 
  
One day, while he was bathing in 
the river, a hawk flew over with a 
mouse in its claws. Suddenly, 
the mouse fell from the hawk's 
grip right into the hands of the 
Guru. 
 
  
When the Guru noticed that the hawk was flying above, he knew he cannot 
leave the mouse alone, or he is to be caught again. He put the mouse on a 
leaf of a nearby Banyan tree, and took a second bath to purify himself. 
  
He used his powers to transform the female mouse into a little girl, and took 
her to the hermitage. 
  
He said to his wife, "My dear, please accept her as our blessing, as we do not 
have a child of our own." 
  
Thus, the girl started growing in the hermitage, under the care and 
supervision of the Guru himself. She learnt many sciences, and ways of life. 
  
Both the Guru and his wife were very proud of their special child. 
  
One day, the Guru's wife brought into his notice that their girl had reached 
marriageable age. They decided to give it a serious thought, as she was a 
special child and deserved a special husband. 
  
The next morning, using his powers, the Guru summoned the Sun God to 
him, and said, "Please accept my daughter's hand. I wish you to marry her, if 
she chooses so." 
  
  
  
 
But the daughter said, "Father, the Sun God lights up the entire world, but he 
is unbearably hot and fiery-tempered. I do not wish to marry him. Please seek 
a better husband for me." 
  
The Guru wondered, "Who might be better than even the Sun God?" 
  
The Sun God advised, "Guruji, you can seek the alliance of the King of 
Clouds. He is superior to me, for he can cover me and my light." 
  
So the Guru, using his powers, summoned the King of Clouds, and said, 
"Please accept my daughter's hand. I wish you to marry her, if she chooses 
so." 
  
But the daughter said, "Father, the King of Clouds is dark, wet and too cold. I 
do not wish to marry him. Please seek a better husband for me." 
  
The Guru wondered, "Who might be better than even the King of Clouds?" 
The King of Clouds advised, "Guruji, you can seek the alliance of the Lord of 
Winds. He is superior to me, for he can blow me away." 
  
So the Guru, using his powers, summoned the Lord of Winds, and said, 
"Please accept my daughter's hand. I wish you to marry her, if she chooses 
so." 
  
But the daughter said, "Father, the Lord of Winds is too fast and restless. He 
keeps changing his direction. I do not wish to marry him. Please seek a better 
husband for me." 
  
The Guru wondered, "Who might be better than even the Lord of Winds?" 
  
The Lord of Winds advised, "Guruji, you can seek the alliance of the Lord of 
Mountains. He is superior to me, for he can stop me from blowing." 
  
So the Guru, using his powers, summoned the Lord of Mountains, and said, 
"Please accept my daughter's hand. I wish you to marry her, if she chooses 
so." 
  
But the daughter said, "Father, the Lord of Mountains is too hard and rigid. 
He is immovable. I do not wish to marry him. Please seek a better husband 
for me." 
  
The Guru wondered, "Who might be better than even the Lord of Mountains?" 
  
The King of Mountains advised, "Guruji, you can seek the alliance of the King 
of Mice. He is superior to me, for he can make holes all over me."  
  
 
So the Guru, using his powers, summoned the King of Mice, and said, 
"Please accept my daughter's hand. I wish you to marry her, if she chooses 
so." 
  
When the daughter met the King of Mice, she was delighted and shyly agreed 
to the marriage. 
  
The Guru transformed her daughter to a beautiful female mouse, for her to 
perform all household duties of her clan. 
  
Thus, the Guru's daughter was married. 
   
The wise indeed say: 
What is in-born, can never change. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
39. Tale of Golden Droppings 
 
There was a special bird named 
Sindhuka, who lived in a huge 
tree on the top of a mountain. 
When her droppings fell on the 
earth, they turned into gold. 
  
One day, a hunter wandered to 
the top of the mountain. Not able 
to catch any bird, he decided to 
take some rest under the huge 
tree. From the top of the tree, the 
bird discharged its droppings, 
which fell near the hunter, and 
turned into gold. He was wonder-
struck. 
  
The hunter thought, "All these years I have been catching birds, but I have 
never heard of a bird's droppings turn into gold. This is a special bird, which I 
will have to catch!" 
 
He set up a trap on the tree, which the bird did not notice and he was caught. 
The hunter, who was waiting nearby, immediately put him in a cage and 
started homewards. On the other hand, the bird repented that he was 
careless, not to notice the trap. 
  
On his way, he thought, "If I keep this bird, I will become rich, and everyone 
will be suspicious. Someday, someone will come to know the truth of the 
riches, and the bird, and report it to the king. I rather present the bird to the 
king, and be content with whatever he offers me in return." 
  
SO, he went straight to the palace and told the king everything. He gifted the 
bird to the king. 
  
The king was delighted to have a bird whose droppings turned into gold, and 
asked his attendants to treat the bird as the royal bird, "Take proper care of 
this bird. Put him in a lavish cage, and give him plenty of food and water." 
  
Suddenly, one of the king's ministers requested, "O King, How can a bird's 
droppings turn into gold? How can you trust this mere hunter who is not 
knowledgeable? I advise you to release the cage and let the bird go. As for 
the hunter, please punish him for forgery." 
   
  
 
The king pondered over the words of his trusted and knowledgeable minister, 
and asked his guards to arrest the hunter and release the bird. 
  
No sooner had the bird freed, it flew up and perched himself at the top of a 
nearby gate. He discharged his droppings, which to the amazement of the 
king and his ministers, turned into gold. 
  
Realizing he had made a mistake, the king ordered his guards to catch the 
bird. But the bird was already free, he promised himself not to be careless 
again, and flew off where nobody can catch her again. 
  
The wise indeed say: 
Check thoroughly even what seems to be impossible. 
 
  
  
 
40. Cave that Talked 
Kharanakhara was a lion who 
ruled over a certain part of a 
jungle. 
  
One day, he could not prey upon 
a single animal after wandering 
around the jungle in search of 
food. It was almost sunset, and 
the lion started returning in spite 
of being very hungry. 
  
On his way, he saw a big cave, and thought to himself, "It is for sure that 
some animal must be living in this big cave. Such a nice cave cannot be un-
inhabitated. At sunset, whatever animal lives here is bound to return. I shall 
hide inside the cave and wait for my dinner to arrive." 
 
The cave was the home to a jackal, who arrived a while after the lion had 
hidden himself inside. While entering he noticed the footprints of the lion 
leading into the cave, but could not find any footprint coming out. 
  
He thought, "If a lion is indeed entered, I will be dead as soon as I enter. But, 
how can I be sure? There is no reason for me to stay away from my home if 
there is no lion inside. I must find out a way to confirm if the lion is still inside." 
  
The jackal thought of a plan, and standing in front of the cave, began to 
shout, "Hello Cave! Hello Cave! Can I come inside?" 
  
For some moment, he waited in silence and shouted again, "Hello Cave! 
Have you forgotten our understanding of all these years? I always wait for 
your reply before I enter. Why are you silent today? I shall then go to some 
other cave if you do not reply." 
  
On hearing this, the lion thought, "The cave must reply to the jackal when he 
returns at sunset. It is because I am inside that the cave is not replying today. 
I must invite on behalf of the cave, or the jackal will go away." 
  
So, the lion replied from inside the cave, "Hello Jackal, you may enter. It is 
safe inside." 
  
  
  
 
The reply was even more frightening due to the echo from the walls of the 
cave. The jackal at once knew that the lion was waiting for him to enter and 
make a meal out of him. He ran off, as fast as he could and saved himself. 
  
The wise indeed say: 
Use your tactics to protect yourself from destruction. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
41. Frogs that Rode a Snake 
 
There was an old snake named 
Mandavishya, who lived near a 
mountain. 
  
Due to his old age, he was 
unable to prey on frogs. He 
thought, "I am too old to hunt for 
food. I will not be able to live long 
without food, and it is only going 
to make me weaker to hunt, as 
well. I have to think of 
something". 
 
Suddenly, an idea struck him. As planned, he went to a nearby pond, which 
was full of frogs, and relaxed on the bank of the pond without any intention to 
hunt. He behaved as though he had nothing to do with the frogs. 
 
At first the frogs ran away, but as he was not hunting, the frogs gathered 
some courage and approached him. One of them asked, "O Snake! Why do 
you not hunt, as is your behaviour?" 
  
The snake replied casually, "I have no desire for food, as I am unfortunate. I'll 
explain to you. Last night, when I was wandering about in search of frogs, I bit 
a Brahmin's son in frustration of not finding any prey. The Brahmin cursed 
me. He said, 'From now onwards, you shall be able to do nothing but serve 
frogs. You will have to live off what frogs offer to you!' And so, I lie here, to 
serve any frogs who wants my services. I can give a ride on my back to any 
frog who wishes for a ride" 
  
When the news reached the king of frogs, he visited the snake along with his 
ministers. On being assured by the snake that he means no harm, the king 
decided to take a ride on the snake's back. The snake rode him around the 
pond, and the king was very entertained. Even the ministers and other 
snakes took turns to ride the snake, and they were very entertained, too. 
  
The snake, too, proved himself a good entertainer by exhibiting various styles 
of crawling. The frogs, especially the king of frogs, were delighted. The frogs 
jumped and hopped all the way. 
  
 
  
  
 
The next morning the snake pretended to be weak and crawled slowly on 
purpose. The king of frogs, on the other hand, was excited to start the 
morning with a ride on the snake's back. He observed the snake's behaviour 
and enquired. 
  
The snake replied, "I am too weak to crawl. I have not eaten for so long, and 
must eat something to be strong to give you a ride." 
  
The king of frogs thought for a while, consulted his ministers, and decided 
that they must serve the snake one frog a day to keep him strong. This was 
what the snake had planned for. He praised his kindness, and gave him and 
the other frogs a ride on his back. 
  
From then onwards, the snake gave ride to the frogs, and got to eat one frog 
every day. In a short time, he regained strength. On the other hand, the king 
of frogs was too excited to realize the frogs were rapidly decreasing in 
numbers and there were only a handful of them that remained. 
  
The frog king was so completely taken in by the snake's talk that he did not 
understand his real motive. 
  
One day, a big black snake arrived at the bank of the pond. He was very 
surprised to see the excited frogs hopping in joy, and riding on the snake's 
back. 
  
The black snake enquired, "O friend! Why are you carrying frogs on your 
back? They are our food!" 
  
The old snake explained everything to the black snake. He continued, "I have 
discovered many different tastes after eating many different frogs here. I have 
this easy way of life, and enjoying it here." 
  
Over time, the snake had eaten even the larger snakes, and started eating 
the ministers and the king's relatives. Finally, one day, he ate the king also 
and thus, the entire frogs in the pond perished. 
  
The wise indeed say: 
Beware of deception from all quarters including your friends. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
42. War of Crows and Owls 
There was a huge Banyan tree 
near a city called Mahilaropyam. 
Its unnumerable branches were 
home to a large number of 
crows. Meghavarana was the 
king of these crows. 
  
There was a cave nearby, which 
was home of a large number of 
owls. Arimaradana was the king 
of these owls. 
 
 
 
   
The owls, as they regarded the crows as enemies, would fly around the 
Banyan tree every night. And if they caught hold of any crows, they would 
attack them and kill them. The crows could not see as clearly as the owls 
during the night, and could not save themselves. As time went by, many 
crows were killed. 
 
Meghavarana, the king of crows had a council of five ministers: Ujjeevi, 
Sanjeevi, Anujjevi, Prajeevi and Chiranjeevi. He addressed them, "O 
Ministers, our enemy takes advantage by attacking at night and succeeds in 
killing many of us as we cannot fight them in dark. We cannot attck them at 
daytime since we don't know their stronghold. The enemy is dangerous and 
we need to decide what to do. Please advise me with your views." 
  
Ujjeevi suggested, "O Majesty, I advise you to make peace with the enemy as 
the enemy is strong and untiring" 
  
Sanjeevi said, "O King, the enemy is not only strong but also cruel and 
follows no ethics of war. Peace with such party cannot last. Let us fight in a 
way that we can gain advantage." 
  
Anujeevi advised, "The enemy is stronger than us, so it will not be wise to 
fight them. They are cruel and have not ethics, so we cannot make peace 
with them. I suggest we retreat to a safer place." 
  
Prajeevi said, "I advise entrenchment. We will be safe only in our own home. 
If we desert our post, we will never be able to return." 
  
Chiranjeevi said, "Let us seek the advice of allies and defeat the enemy with 
their assistance."  
  
 
The king of crows was not satisfied with the suggestions and sought the 
advice of Sthirajeevi, an old minister of the king's father, "You have heard the 
suggestions by my ministers. Please suggest me the right course of action 
that we should adopt." 
  
Sthirajeevi replied, "Your Majesty, all ministers have suggested in accordance 
to nitishashtra, and their recommendations are indeed good. But they do not 
serve the situation that we are in. For an enemy who is much stronger than 
us, we should a path of intrigue. You will need to send spies to find their 
weak-points to outwit the enemy" 
  
The king of crows agreed as Sthirajeevi explained the plan, "Like I advise you 
to employ spies, the enemies also must have spies. Let us pretend that I am 
a traitor, and start cursing me with cruel words. Beat me till I bleed and throw 
me down. This will mislead the spies to believe I am their enemy's enemy. 
After this, fly with everybody to the safe Rshyamukam Mountain and keep 
deeply entrenched till I join you" 
  
Sthirajeevi continued, "Meanwhile, I will gain confidence with our enemies to 
learn about their weaknesses and return to join you when we can strike them 
to gain victory. Please do not worry about me, I can take care of myself." 
 
The king did as the wise crow had planned and immediately started a fake 
quarrel. Sthirajeevi used abusive language which angered the other crows. 
Meghavarana pounced upon Sthirajeevi, smeared him with blood and threw 
him down the Banyan tree. 
  
After this, he asked all crows to follow him, and flew straight to Rshyamukam 
Mountain, whereupon he waited for Sthirajeevi to return - as was planned. 
  
The owl-spies immediately informed the king of the owls of the fight and 
Arimaradana decided to attack the terrified crows with all might after dark.  
 
But when they reached the Banyan tree, the crows had already left. They 
started investigating which direction the crows had flown to catch them. 
  
At this moment, Sthirajeevi began to caw feebly to attract the attention of the 
king of owls. Arimaradana heard the sound and was surprised to see 
Sthirajeevi. Sthirajeevi started praising Arimaradana as much as he cursed 
Meghavarana. He further said, "I know where they will entrench themselves. 
As soon as I regain some strength to fly again, I shall take you there!" 
  
Arimaradana had five ministers: Raktaksha, Kriuraksha, Deeptaksha, 
Vakranasa, and Prakarakarna. While Raktaksha, Kriuraksha did not trust 
Sthirajeevi and wanted to kill him, the others suggested that he could prove  
  
 
beneficial to locate the enemies. So, Arimaradana decided to take Sthirajeevi 
to their cave and offered a suitable place to rest. 
  
But Sthirajeevi had other plans. He quickly requested Arimaradana to allow 
him to make a nest at entrance of the cave. He did not want the other owls to 
get offended since he belonged to the enemy clan. Arimaradana permitted 
and asked other to take good care of him. Thereby, Sthirajeevi was fed with 
the choicest of foods and regained strength. 
  
However, Raktaksha was learned in nitishastra and warned his king of his 
suspicions, but they fell into deaf ears and Arimaradana was impressed on 
the flattery Sthirajeevi showered all the time. Finally Raktaksha and few of his 
followers left the cave. 
  
All this time, Sthirajeevi had gathered a lot of twigs at the entrance of the 
cave on the pretending to build a nest. He was happy that Raktaksha had 
departed, and waited till noon to silently fly away to Rshyamukam Mountain. 
  
He reported to Meghavarana, "Your Majesty, my task is finished, but I do not 
have the time to explain everything to you. I have collected twigs and 
branches at the entrance of the cave that serves as the owl's stronghold. 
They will easily catch fire killing all the owls inside. Please follow me with your 
followers with burning wood in your beak" 
  
So, they immediately followed Sthirajeevi to the owl's cave and dropped the 
pieces of burning wood they were carrying on the entrance of the cave. The 
twigs gathered outside caught fire and the owls perished inside due to fire 
and smoke. Sthirajeevi had indeed been constructing a funeral pyre for the 
owls. 
  
Now, the crows fearlessly returned to their Banyan tree, and with the help of 
Sthirajeevi, Meghavarana ruled justly thereafter. 
  
The wise indeed say: 
Never trust your enemy, and don't allow a foe into your home. 
 
 
 
  
  
 
43. Monkey and Crocodile 
 
 
There was a Jamun (Black-berry) 
tree on the bank of a river, which 
was full of sweeet Jamun fruits 
throughout the year. This tree 
was home to a monkey called 
Raktamukha. He used to pass 
his days happily by playing and 
jumping, and used to eat the 
sweet Jamun fruits. 
  
 
  
One day, a crocodile named Karalamukha came out of the river to take some 
rest under the Jamun tree. When Raktamukha saw him from the tree, he 
said, "O Crocodile, this tree is my home and you have come under this tree to 
take rest. This makes you my guest. Please accept some Jamun fruits." 
 
Raktamukha plucked lots of fruits and threw them in the crocodile's mouth. 
Karalamukha loved the sweet fruits, and became friendly with Raktamukha. 
Karalamukha left in the evening after thanking the generosity of the monkey. 
  
Karalamukha started coming to the Jamun tree every day, and they became 
good friends. They would talk for a long time and enjoy eating the sweet 
Jamun fruits together. 
  
One day, Karalamukha said to Raktamukha that he wanted to take some of 
the Jamun fruits for her wife to let her know of the sweetness of these fruits. 
So, the monkey happily plucked more fruits for the crocodile to take home. 
  
Karalamukha took those fruits and offered his wife to eat them, and narrated 
the story of his friendship with the monkey who lives on the Jamun tree. The 
crocodile's wife was overjoyed on eating those sweet fruits. 
  
She said, "O Dear, these fruits are as sweet as nectar. If the monkey eats 
these fruits every day, I wonder, he would be even tastier. Please bring the 
monkey's heart for me." 
 
  
  
 
Karalamukha was astonished on hearing this. He said, "O Dear, I cannot kill 
or deceive the monkey for his heart. He is my friend. It is unfair to think of 
such a thing" 
  
But his wife pleaded for the monkey's heart. When she could not convince the 
crocodile of doing it for her, she stopped eating, and insisted that we would 
rather die if the crocodile refused to do as she wished. 
  
Karalamukha was left with no other choice but to succumb to her wishes. 
Although he was sad, he devised a plan to catch his friend and went to 
Raktamukha. 
  
He said, "O Friend, my wife love the fruits very much and I told my wife about 
our friendship. Now, she is anxious to meet you. She is angry on me for not 
introducing you with her earlier. So, she has invited you to our home for 
dinner. Please accept our invitation." 
  
The monkey accepted at once, but how could he go to the crocodile's home? 
I could not swim. The crocodile said, "Sit on my back, and I shall carry you to 
my home" 
  
And so Raktamukha sat on Karalamukha and they entered the water of the 
river. Karalamukha took him to deeper water where he planned to kill him. At 
the same time, Raktamukha got very scared with so much water all around 
him. he pleaded his friend to move slowly. 
  
At this moment, the crocodile knew that he had succeeded in his plan and 
had the monkey totally under his control. He thought that it was not possible 
for the monkey to escape from him so he revealed his plan, "O monkey, the 
truth is I am taking you to make my wife happy. She wishes to eat your heart. 
She believes that the taste should be even better than the Jamun fruits you 
have all the time." 
  
Upon hearing this, Raktamukha was taken aback. But he did not panic. 
Instead, he wittingly said, "O Friend, Why didn't you say that before? It would 
be my priviledge if I could serve your wife with my heart. You are such a good 
friend, and you should have told me earlier. I keep my heart in the burrow of 
the Jamun tree. Let us go back and bring my heart at once." 
  
The foolish crocodile believed him, and turned around. Karalamukha took 
Raktamukha to the Banyan tree believing the monkey to bring his heart from 
the tree. But as soon as Raktamukha jumped down from the crocodile's back, 
he climbed up the tree and sat on a high branch. He had finally saved himself 
from the crocodile's evil plan. 
   
  
 
Karalamukha wanted to know, "What is causing this delay? We are getting 
late, and my wife has been waiting." 
  
Raktamukha answered, "O foolish friend, how can one take out his own heart 
and keep it in the burrow of the tree? You deceived me to kill me, and in 
return I tricked you in saving myself. Let this be a lesson to you for being so 
unfaithful. Go away, and never return back." 
  
The crocodile knew he had been tricked, and felt ashamed for his actions. He 
went away. 
  
The wise indeed say: 
Use intelligence to win in difficult situations. 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
44. Greedy Cobra and King of Frogs 
Gangadatta was a king among 
frogs. He ruled over a group of 
frogs that lived in a well. 
  
His relatives were always 
nagging to him over small things, 
and he was fed-up with them. 
One day, he climbed up the 
water-wheel and left his 
kingdom. 
  
He sought revenge on his relatives, due to whose constant torment; he had to 
leave his kingdom. Just then, he saw a cobra entering his hole. He thought of 
a plan of having his relatives eaten up by the cobra. 
 
He went to the entrance of the hole, and said, "My friend, I have come to 
make friends to you. I am the king of frogs!" 
  
On hearing this, the cobra realized that it was not the voice of his kith or kin, 
but his natural enemy. He decided not to leave his hole and come out, for he 
suspected some foul reason. He suspected someone might be trying to catch 
him through mantra (magic spell), or maybe flute, or even herbs. 
  
He answered cautiously, "Who are you? Why do you talk this nonsense about 
friendship? Can timber and fire ever be friends? You are my natural enemy!" 
  
The king of frogs replied, "Indeed, your words are true. But I seek revenge on 
my relatives who have tormented me for years. I ask your help. I can lead you 
to the well, that is my forsaken kingdom, and you can eat as many frogs as 
you want" 
  
The cobra enquired, "A well is built by layers of stone. I have no legs. How 
can I possibly get into the well? And even if I manage to do so, where will I be 
able to sit and eat the frogs? Go away!" 
  
The king of frogs assured, "There is a nice comfortable hols at the edge of 
the water, where you can sit and eat. I will lead you to the inside of the well, 
and to the comfortable hole. But you will have to promise me that you will eat 
only my annoying relatives and not my friends." 
  
  
  
 
The cobra thought of his old age, and this offer was not good to be turned 
down. The greedy cobra agreed to the friendship and followed the frog. He 
went into the hole as promised. Once there, he would eat one frog whenever 
he would feel hungry. As days went by, the number of frogs went down and 
finally all annoying frogs were exhausted. 
  
One day, the cobra called out to the king of frogs and said, "There are no 
more frogs to eat here, only your friends remain. Please give me some more 
food. You are my friend, and it is you who have led me here, so you are 
responsible for my food." 
  
The king of frogs realized his mistake for the cobra wanted more, so he could 
do nothing but watch the cobra eat all the other frogs. Even his close friends 
and his son were eaten. He was hungry and wanted the king of frogs to send 
some more frogs. 
  
The king of frogs realized, that only he among the frogs remained alive. He 
assured the cobra that if he let him leave the well, he will bring frogs from 
other wells, so that the cobra would be able to satisfy his hunger. 
 
The cobra got greedy, and let the king of frogs go. But even after his anxious 
wait for several days, the king of frogs did not return. 
  
After a long time of waiting, the cobra requested a female lizard that lived in 
the walls of the well, to request the king of frogs to return, as he could not 
bear the separation of his dear friend. 
  
The lizard conveyed the message to the king of frogs, who replied, "Madam, 
please convey to him that I will never return to the well again. He is starved, 
and a starving person can be cruel, and go to any extent of sin." 
  
Thus, the king of frogs saved himself, and the greedy cobra had to perish 
inside the well without any food. 
  
The wise indeed say: 
Fight your own battles; else you will surely be destroyed. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
45. Lion and Foolish Donkey 
 
Karalakesara was a lion, who 
was constantly accompanied by a 
jackal, as his attendant. 
  
One day, the lion was severely 
wounded in a fierce battle with an 
elephant. He could not walk 
properly, let alone hunt for prey. 
As a result, the jackal had no 
food either. 
 
  
As days went by, without food, the jackal said, "O Master, I am not being able 
to serve you because I am too weak. I have not eaten for several days." 
 
The lion replied, "O Jackal, please find an animal that I can kill even in my 
present weakness. Otherwise, we will both die of starvation." 
  
Thus, the jackal went out of the cave in search of food. He wandered in a 
jungle and reached close to a village. He noticed a donkey from the village 
had strayed into the borders of the jungle to eat green grass. 
  
The jackal greeted the donkey warmly, "Greetings uncle! I see you gave 
grown thin and look tired. Why is that so?" 
  
The donkey replied, "I have a cruel master! He would make me work the 
entire day with heavy burdens, and hardly provide me a handful of green 
grass. Although there is danger here, I could not stop myself from grazing in 
these green grasses." 
  
The jackal replied, "Uncle! Come with me! Deep inside the jungle, my master 
protects all animals from the cruelty of humans. There are green grasses all 
around that shines like emerald. You can finally lead a relaxing life!" 
  
Enticed in this manner, the donkey believed the jackal and followed him to the 
lion's cave. The lion on the other hand, saw the jackal bring a donkey with 
him; he was too delighted to wait for them to come closer and jumped on the 
donkey. The lion had grown weaker than he could have anticipated himself, 
and missed the donkey. 
  
The lion fell on the ground near the donkey. When the donkey saw this, he 
ran as fast as he could, to save his life.  
  
 
The lion was ashamed of his actions, and the jackal said, "Today, even a 
donkey can escape from you! I will try to bring him back. But this time, please 
wait for us to come closer. You are not strong to jump much distance now" 
  
Saying thus, the jackal ran after the donkey. Knowing the ways of the jungle, 
he was able to overtake him and stop him on the way. 
  
The donkey said, "Some nice place you took me to! You took me to the very 
jaws of death. What animal was it, which tried to jump on me?" 
The jackal at once replied, "O Uncle, you ran because you misunderstood! It 
was a female donkey who wanted to embrace you! She had not seen a male 
donkey for years, and could not stop herself from jumping on you." 
  
The jackal continued, "If it was any other animal, a lion or a tiger, would he 
have missed you? Could you be able to escape from him?" 
  
The donkey was thus coaxed by the jackal once more, and followed him back 
to the lion's cave. This time, however, the lion made no mistake and attacked 
only once he was sure. The donkey met his death. 
  
But, the lion grew tired, as he was very weak. He asked the jackal to guard 
over the carcass till he arrived back from the river to take a bath and drink 
some water. 
  
The jackal, on the other hand, could not bear the hunger anymore. He had 
not eaten for several days, and he had food spread right before his eyes. Out 
of hunger, he ate the donkey's brain. 
  
When the lion returned, and saw that the donkey's brain was missing, he got 
angry. He asked the jackal to explain how his food had been contaminated. 
  
The jackal replied, "Please master, don't be angry. This donkey had no brain 
at all! If he had any brain, would he come back to you, after you attacked 
him?" 
  
The lion was satisfied with the reply, and the both of them finally had a good 
meal after several days. 
  
The wise indeed say: 
Deception with sweet words succeeds beyond limit. 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
46. Story of Potter 
Yudhisthira was the name of a 
poor potter who lived in a certain 
kingdom. 
  
One night, when he was 
returning after drinking more than 
he should, he stumbled and fell 
over some pots. When he got up, 
he saw blood was oozing out of 
his forehead. There was a deep 
cut due to a broken piece of pot. 
 
  
Poor that he was, he did not go apply any medicine on his wound, which is 
the reason that the wound did not heal for a long time. After a long time, the 
wound finally healed by itself, but it left a big scar on his forehead. 
 
Soon afterwards, there was a famine in the country, and he decided to leave 
his place and travel to another part of the country. On his way, he joined a 
group of people, who served at the royal household. Along with them, he 
started serving at the royal household. 
  
One day, the king noticed the big scar on his forehead and thought, "This 
man must be a great warrior. The scar on his forehead is evident that he has 
received such wound in some battle. He must be very brave." 
  
Thus, the king promoted him as a warrior and he was honoured with a place 
amongst the best warriors of the kingdom. 
  
The other household workers knew that he was no warrior, and became 
jealous of the fact that the king favoured him, although he did not deserve it 
rightly. 
  
Soonafter, a battle was impending and the king summoned all his warriors. 
He wanted to speak to all the great warriors personally and gift them with 
precious items as an encouragement. The king addressed the soldiers with 
encouraging words and inspected the equipments, and weapons, and even 
the elephants and horses. 
  
On the other hand, the potter was no real warrior, and he feared going into 
the battleground. All the preparations for battle made him tense. But he was 
resolved to prove himself as a warrior in the battleground. 
   
  
 
While inspecting, the king noticed the potter. He took him aside and asked, 
"O Warrior, fighting which battle did you get this deadly scar?" 
  
The potter replied, "O king, this scar was not caused by any wound by any 
sword. Being a potter by profession myself, my home was full of pots. One 
night, I tripped after drinking more than I should have, I tripped over them that 
caused this wound. Due to improper attention, the wound left this big scar." 
  
When the king heard the truth, he felt embarrassed for his earlier decision. He 
asked his soldiers, "He is a potter, who has deceived me by pretending to be 
a warrior. Drive him away from the army!" 
  
The potter fell on his knees, and pleaded to the king, "O King, please do not 
do this. Have mercy on me, for I am sure I will be able to prove my bravery on 
the battleground. Please give me a chance to prove my worth." 
  
The king replied, "You may have excellent qualities, and you may be brave. 
But you do not possess the qualities required on the battleground. When the 
other warriors will come to know that you are only a potter, they will ridicule 
you. You will get yourself killed on the battleground! It is better if you leave, 
and return to your home." 
  
The potter understood the king's advice, and left the palace immediately. 
  
The wise indeed say: 
Continue being what you are, else you pay for it. 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
47. Lioness and Young Jackal 
 
A lion and a lioness couple lived 
in the jungle. They were very 
happy, as they had given birth to 
two male cubs, and had newly 
become parents. 
  
The lion was responsible for 
hunting and providing food for the 
lion and the two cubs. So, every 
day, he would go out in the 
morning and would come back 
within evening with food, and 
provide it to the lioness, who fed 
the cubs and herself. 
  
One day, it was nearing sunset and but the lion had not found any prey after 
wandering throughout the jungle. 
 
He thought of returning empty-handed. On his way, he found a baby jackal. 
He would finally be able to provide food for his family. But he took pity on the 
jackal, because it was just a baby. So, instead of killing him, the lion carried 
the baby jackal home and presented him to the lioness. 
  
The lioness said, "My dear, He is only a baby. How can I kill and eat the 
jackal that you have not killed yourself. Let us then raise the jackal with our 
own cubs. They will soon like each other and play together as brothers." 
  
And so, the lion and the lioness started caring and raising him as their own, 
without making any differentiation or partiality towards any of them. 
  
However, as they grew up, they behaved differently and often fought among 
themselves. This was because the jackal had different traits of his species. 
But the lion and the lioness overlooked their childhood actions. 
  
One day, as they were playing near their den, a wild elephant approached 
them. While the young jackal prepared to flee, the young lions rushed forward 
to attack. The young jackal said, "He is a natural enemy. Come with me, let 
us go home." 
  
The young lions followed him back, but they were amazed by their brother's 
cowardice. They laughed at their brother, and made fun of him. They even 
mocked and told the story to their parents. This made the jackal very angry.  
  
 
When the mother lioness talked to the young jackal later, the jackal said, "I 
am not inferior to them in any action. May it be bravery, or looks or education 
or intelligence. Look at how they ridicule me! I have promised myself that I will 
kill them as my revenge!" 
  
When the lioness heard these words, she knew immediately what to do. She 
said, "My son, what you say is true. You are not inferior, but you are a jackal 
and behave like your species. Many years ago, I took pity on you and raised 
you among by cubs as my own son. But, now that you talk of revenge, I must 
ask you to leave." 
  
The lioness roared, "Go away, and do not return again, or I shall kill you 
myself. Return to your clan where you belong." 
  
When the jackal heard this, he fled immediately to find his own clan and live 
among them. 
  
The wise indeed say: 
Know the truth about yourself and act accordingly. 
 
 
  
  
 
48. Donkey and Washerman 
Shuddapatta was a washer man, 
who had a donkey to help him 
with his chores. 
  
But he could not take proper 
care of his donkey. The 
surroundings where he lived, 
lacked grass; and the washer 
man did not have enough to offer 
the donkey to eat. As a result, 
the donkey had grown lean and 
weak. Even Shuddapatta was 
worried with his donkey's health. 
 
  
One particular day, Shuddapatta was wandering in the jungle, where he came 
across a dead tiger. He at once struck an idea. 
 
He thought, "It is my luck that I have a dead tiger. I will skin the tiger and take 
the skin home. I will cover the donkey with the tiger's skin and let him graze in 
the nearby barley fields after sunset. The farmers will not dare to come near 
him fearing my donkey as a tiger. This way, he will be able to eat as much as 
he wants." 
  
The washer man did so after sunset, and the donkey returned unharmed after 
he had eaten to his heart's content. 
  
From then onwards, the washer man would cover his donkey with the tiger's 
skin every night and lead him to the fields. The farmers did spot him, but 
mistook it for a tiger. They did not even venture out of their homes in fear. All 
the time, the donkey ate as much as he liked and returned home. In the 
morning, he would stand in the washer man's stall without anybody 
suspecting anything. 
  
As time passed, the donkey regained his health, and the washer man did not 
have to worry about his food. 
  
One night, as he was feeding on the fresh barley crops in the fields, he heard 
a sound. It was a female donkey braying from a distance. He was attracted 
and brayed in return. 
  
  
  
 
The farmers, who were watching him from inside for fear of the tiger, heard 
this and realized that it was a donkey and not a tiger. They came out to 
observe, it was indeed a donkey dressed in tiger's skin. They chased the 
donkey with sticks, and killed him. 
  
The wise indeed say: 
Do not pretend to be what you are not. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
49. Price of Indiscretion 
 
Ujjwalaka was a cart-maker, who 
was very poor due to lack of 
orders for cart-making. 
  
One day, he was fed-up with his 
poor condition, and thought, "I 
languish in this poverty, when all 
other people have some work or 
the other that pays them. I don't 
have a proper home, or proper 
clothing, or proper food. There is 
no point in staying here; I shall go 
somewhere else to seek 
success." 
  
Thus, the cart-maker took his family and left the town. As he was going 
through the jungle, he saw a female camel in pain. 
  
He noticed that the female camel was left behind by a caravan due to her 
labour pains. He gave her water, and grass and she recovered. She also 
gave birth to a baby camel. 
  
Next morning, he took the camel and the baby camel under his patronage, 
and took them to his home. This became the new home for the camels. 
  
The camels were very happy. Over time, the baby camel grew taller, and the 
cart-maker locingly tied a bell around the young camel's neck. 
  
He started selling the female camel's milk, and the earnings were enough for 
him to support his family. He realized that this business was profitable, and 
he did not require to seek any job. 
  
One day, he said to his wife, "I can support the family by selling the milk of 
one camel. This profession is too easy, and yet profitable. I shall borrow 
some money from a wealthy merchant and buy another camel. During the 
time that I am gone, please take proper care of the camels." 
  
His wife agreed with him, and he started the journey. After a few days, he 
returned with a young camel. He was fortunate, and within a few years he 
owned many camels. He even employed a servant to take proper care of the 
camels. He would reward the servant one baby camel every year. 
   
  
 
Thus, the cart-maker became rich, and led a happy life. He took care of the 
camels, and the younger ones, but his favourite camel was the baby camel 
who wore a bell around his neck. The jingling sound she made, made the 
cart-maker very happy. 
  
Every afternoon, the camels would graze in the nearby jungle, and ate tender 
grass. They would also drink water from a big lake, and bath and play games 
there. They would return before sunset. 
  
The young camel that had a bell around his neck always trailed behind the 
others. Due to this, the other camels always advised him to keep up with 
them, leat he stray away and get lost. Despite numerous advices, scoldings, 
and warnings, he remained conceited, and wandered about on his own. 
Being their master's favourite, he was proud of himself. 
 
One day, as the camels were grazing about, a lion came wandering. He was 
attracted by the sound of the bell from a distance, and cautiously observed 
the group of camels. As he waited for an opportune moment, he noticed the 
young camels with bell around his neck trailing behind and straying away 
from the group. 
 
The lion followed him, and overtook the camel. Before the camel could raise 
his voice to alert the others, the lion jumped on him and killed him instantly. 
  
The wise indeed say: 
A foolish person who refuses to follow a good advice surely comes to 
grief. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
50. Jackal's Strategy 
There was a wide jackal called 
Mahachaturaka, who lived in a 
jungle. 
  
One day, as he was wandering 
about in the jungle in search of 
food, he saw a dead elephant. 
He knew that the dead elephant 
will provide him food for many 
days. But his happiness soon 
turned into frustration, as he was 
not able to tear the elephant's 
thick skin. He went round and 
round, trying his luck from all 
side, but in vain. 
 
  
As he was still trying to figure out, the jackal saw a lion approaching. He 
quickly bowed, and said, "O King of jungle, I found this dead elephant and 
was keeping a watch over it so that you can have it. Please be kind to eat to 
your heart's content." 
  
But the lion refused, "I eat a prey only when I hunt it myself. That is my 
nature. Thank you for your offer, but you can have the elephant for yourself" 
  
The lion departed after being thanked by the jackal. But his problem 
remained. He wondered how he can tear apart the elephant's thick skin. 
  
At the very moment he saw a leopard approaching. He thought, "I got rid of 
the lion by being humble, but I have to be cunning in order to get rid of him!" 
  
At once the jackal climbed on top of the elephant and raised his shoulders 
proudly. He said to the jackal, "O Uncle! You have come here to the very jaws 
of death! This elephant was hunted by the lion. He asked me to guard it and 
call for him if anybody was to approach it." 
  
The leopard noticed the lions tracks nearby, and believed him. He began to 
tremble in fear. He pleaded, "O Nephew! Please do not tell the lion I was 
here. I must leave and look for food elsewhere." 
  
With this, the leopard ran away, after assuring the jackal not to tell the lion 
that he was here. But his problem remained. He wondered how he can tear 
apart the elephant's thick skin.  
  
 
Now, he saw a tiger approaching. He thought, "I fooled the leopard, but the 
tiger is not a fool. Besides, he has sharp teeth. If I can have him tear the 
elephant's skin, I can finally eat." 
  
He shouted to the tiger, "Hey Tiger, It is a long time since I have seen you. 
You look thin and starved. Be my guest. You can eat this elephant while I 
keep a watch for the lion. He killed the elephant and asked me to look after it 
till he returned. Eat, and don't worry, I'll keep a watch." 
  
The tiger was convinced by the jackal, and delighted. He at once jumped and 
tore apart a big chunk of the elephant's skin. Just as he started eating, the 
jackal jumped, "Here comes the lion, quick! Hide or run away. Here he 
comes." 
  
The tiger ran away as fast as possible. 
  
The jackal was finally ready to eat. The tiger had provided him the opening 
that he needed. Just as he was about to eat, another jackal arrived. 
  
He fought with the other jackal bravely, and chased him away. 
  
Thus, he was finally able to eat the elephant. 
  
The wise indeed say: 
Bow before the mighty, throw something before the low and fight the 
equally powerful. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
51.  Dog Who Went Abroad 
Chitranga was a dog, who lived 
in a certain town which was 
affected by a famine. 
  
People had no food to eat, and 
they cared not to give any to the 
dogs or cattle or any animal. Due 
to lack of food, along with other 
animals, the dogs were starving. 
Some of them even died. 
  
Chitranga was not able to bear the hunger and realizing that the place did not 
offer conditions to live, he decided to leave for a foreign land in search of food 
and better conditions. 
 
After travelling a long distance, he came to a certain town. I saw a door open 
in one of the houses due to the negligence of a rich lady householder. He 
went into the house, and found abundant food. He had not eaten for a long 
time, and ate to his heart's content. Then he thought of leaving silently. 
  
No sooner had he come out of the house, he was spotted by other dogs of 
the neighbourhood. The realized he did not belong to their community and 
chased him. Since, he had his stomach full, he could not run fast, and they bit 
him all over with their sharp teeth. 
  
He somehow escaped, and thought, "It is better to live in peace in one's own 
country, be it affected by famine. I will rather return home." 
  
When he returned to his country, the starving dogs there were curious. His 
friends and relatives gathered around him to enquire about his findings, 
"Please tell us about the foreign country you visited. How is it like? How are 
the people? Is there plenty of food?" 
  
The dog said, "O friends and relatives! What can I say? In the foreign country, 
the women are careless. They leave doors and windows open. There is lots 
of food to eat. But, your own kith and kin will not show any sympathy. They 
will torment you to death." 
  
The wise indeed say: 
The outsiders may tolerate your lapses but not your own kith and kin. 
 
 
  
  
 
52. Brahmani and Mongoose 
Dev Sharma was a Brahmin who 
used to live with his wife in a 
certain town. One day, his wife 
gave birth to a son and they were 
very happy. 
  
On the very same day, a female 
mongoose gave birth to a baby 
mongoose very near his house. 
As destiny would have it, the 
mother mongoose died soon 
after the birth. 
 
  
When they observed this, they took pity on him and the Brahmin's wife 
adopted the little mongoose and started looking after him as his own son. 
 
She served her own breast milk to both her own son and the little mongoose, 
bathed them together and put oil on them together. She was a fond mother 
for both of them. Both her son and the mongoose were very fond of each 
other, and spent all the time together. 
  
However, she was not a fool and knowing that the mongoose was an animal 
in reality, she always kept a guard, "He is a mongoose and will soon develop 
the animal instincts that he has inherited from his species. Someday, he may 
harm my own son. I shall always keep a watch on him." 
  
One day, she had to fetch some water. So, she put her son to bed, and while 
going outside with the pitcher, asked her husband to keep a watch. She said, 
"I am going to the well to fetch some water. Please look after our son and 
make sure the mongoose does not hurt him by mistake." 
  
The Brahmin was careless. Without informing his wife, he got prepared and 
went to beg for alms leaving the little mongoose and their son alone by 
themselves. 
  
As it happened, during the very time they were alone, a poisonous snake 
entered the house through a hold and started approaching the Brahmin's son. 
  
When the mongoose saw this, he attacked his natural enemy to defend the 
child, who was like a brother to him. Although he was small and the snake 
was strong, he fought with all might and bit the snake into pieces and 
eventually killed the snake. His mouth and claws were all smeared with the 
snake's blood.  
  
 
The little mongoose was very proud of itself; and waited outside the house for 
the Brahmin's wife. He was eager to show his mother how brave he was. 
  
Knowing her husband's carelessness, the Brahmin's wife was tensed and 
was returning in a hurry when she saw the little mongoose coming towards 
her. She noticed that he was covered in blood, and without thinking, jumped 
to the conclusion that the mongoose must have attacked her son. 
  
Angered and frustrated, she threw the heavy pitcher - full of water, that she 
was carrying on the little mongoose. The little mongoose was severely 
wounded. 
  
She ran inside, and she was amazed to see her son safely sleeping in his 
cradle. She then saw the snake near the cradle that had been torn into 
shreds. 
  
At once she realized what had happened. She was heart-broken with the 
thought of having hurt the little mongoose, who was like a son to her. 
  
Not knowing who to blame, when her husband returned home, she explained, 
and they were both very sorry for the suffering of their second son. 
  
The wise indeed say: 
Think hard and do not do anything in haste. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
53. Four Treasure-Seekers 
Four Brahmins lived in a certain 
town, who shared a good 
friendship among themselves. 
However, they were utterly poor. 
  
They discussed their condition 
and concluded, "Let us leave this 
place, where we are languishing 
in poverty. Let us go somewhere 
else and prosper" 
  
After meeting their friends and relatives, they started on their travels. After 
some time, they reached a town, where they decided to stay for some time. 
 
There was a Shiva's (the God of death) temple nearby on the bank of a river. 
They worshiped in this temple after bathing in the river. It was there, that they 
met a Yogi, and accompanied him to his hermitage. 
  
The Yogi enquired, "Who are you? And where do you come from? What did 
you come in this town for?" 
  
They explained their condition to the Yogi, "We took this journey to earn 
money. We are in a state of poverty, that we would have died in our town. 
Since, you are an accomplished Yogi, we believe you must be gifted with 
wonderful powers. Please guide us to the path of earning money." 
  
They continued, "We dedicate ourselves to you, and ready to undertake 
whatever path you guide us to. Please help us." 
  
On observing their pitiable condition, the Yogi agreed. He took out four cotton 
wicks, and gave each of them a wick. He said, "With the wick in your hand, 
take the path that takes you to the Himalayas. Keep walking till one of you 
accidentally drops his wick. The location where the wick drops accidentally 
would be the location you would find hidden treasure. Dig it out, and return 
home with the collected treasure." 
  
The four Brahmins took his blessings, and started their journey towards the 
Himalayas. 
  
  
  
 
They travelled for days, when one of them dropped his wick accidentally. He 
dug the place where the cotton wick had fallen, and uncovered a treasure 
filled with copper. He asked his friends, "Come on! There is too much 
treasure for even four of us to carry. Let us collect, and go home. We are now 
rich! You need not go any further!" 
  
The other three discussed and said, "You were destined to this copper 
treasure. We may be destined to richer treasure. You may collect all the 
copper you can and return home. We will continue with our journey." 
  
Thus, the Brahmin collected his treasure and started travelling homewards, 
while the rest of the three Brahmins continued their journey with their wicks in 
their hands. 
  
They travelled for few more days, when one of them dropped his wick 
accidentally. He dug the place where the cotton wick had fallen, and 
uncovered a treasure filled with silver. He asked his friends, "Come on! There 
is too much treasure for even four of us to carry. Let us collect, and go home. 
We are now rich! You need not go any further!" 
  
The other two discussed and said, "You were destined to this silver treasure. 
We may be destined to richer treasure. You may collect all the silver you can 
and return home. We will continue with our journey." 
  
Thus, the Brahmin collected his treasure and started travelling homewards, 
while the rest of the two Brahmins continued their journey with their wicks in 
their hands. 
  
After a few more days of travelling, one of them dropped his wick 
accidentally. He dug the place where the cotton wick had fallen, and 
uncovered a treasure filled with gold. He asked his friend, "Come on! There is 
too much treasure for even four of us to carry. Let us collect, and go home. 
We are now rich! You need not go any further!" 
  
The fourth Brahmin replied, "Stupid! You don't understand what is happening. 
First copper, then silver, now it is gold! You all were destined to these 
treasures. Next time, I am sure I'll find a richer treasure of diamonds and 
pearls. You may go home, but I will continue my journey. I am sure I am 
destined to a richer haul of treasure." 
  
His companion said, "You may continue with your journey, but I will not return 
homewards. I will stay here and guard this treasure of gold, and we will return 
home together after you return." 
  
  
  
 
Thus, the fourth Brahmin continued his journey with his wick in his hand. After 
travelling alone for a few more days, he felt tired. He was suffering from the 
tremendous heat and got very thirsty. Soon, he lost his way, and started 
travelling in circles. 
  
Trying to figure out the right direction, he came across a man with a whirling 
wheel around his head. His body was smeared with blood. 
  
The fourth Brahmin was so thirsty, that instead of helping the man, he asked, 
"Please tell me where I can get some water. Whoever you are, with a wheel 
around your head, Please tell me quickly" 
  
No sooner had he uttered these words, the wheel shifted from the other man 
to this fourth Brahmin. It began whirling around the fourth Brahmin's head; 
and it pained beyond endurance. 
  
He cried, "What is the meaning of this? Why has the wheel attached itself to 
my head? Please tell me how I can get rid of this." 
  
The man relieved from the wheel, replied, "When someone carrying a 
magical cotton wick is to come here, and speak to you. Only then, will you be 
freed from this wheel, and attach itself to him." 
  
He explained, "I do not remember how long I have been here. It was during 
the reign of king Rama, that I procured a magical wick from a Yogi to rid 
myself of poverty. Out of greed, I continued my journey even after I got 
treasure. I met a man here under the same circumstances, and that is how I 
got this wheel on my head from his. You shall be free from hunger, thirst, 
aging or death. But you will have to endure the pain." 
  
He continued, "It was Kuber (God of wealth) who prepared this device so that 
no one dared to approach this place and steal his treasure. Only a man with a 
magical wick can enter this place." 
  
Thus, the other man who was relieved from the wheel, took his leave. The 
fourth Brahmin was left alone. But his companion was worried, as it was 
taking so long for his fellow Brahmin to return. He decided to follow and 
reached the place where his friend was suffering in pain, with blood smeared 
all over his body and wheel whirling around his head. 
  
The third Brahmin enquired, "What has happened to you? How can I help 
you?" 
  
  
  
 
With tears in his eyes, the fourth Brahmin replied, "I was destined for this. 
This is the result of my fate". And, he told the entire story of the wheel to his 
friend. 
  
As there was nothing his companion could do, he prepared to leave, "Even 
being a scholar, you lacked the sense to control your greed. You wanted 
diamonds and pearls, when you already had gold. There is no point in giving 
you company, for no human being can do anything to help you. I should 
depart from this place." 
  
Thus, his friend started his journey to return home, and the fourth Brahmin 
was left all alone. 
  
The wise indeed say: 
Greed only brings misery. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
54. Lion that Sprang to Life 
There lived four friends in 
a certain town. Although, 
all four of them were 
young Brahmins, one of 
them was a complete 
ignorant in matters of 
learning but had good 
common-sense. The 
other three were very 
learned in matters of the 
Holy Scriptures, but 
lacked common-sense. 
 
  
One day, as the four friends were assembled together, they decided, "The 
scholarship that we have over the Holy Scriptures is no good, if we cannot 
use it to impress the king, or otherwise to earn money!" 
 
They decided to travel, in order to earn money using their learnings. But the 
fourth friend was not learned, so they thought of leaving him behind. They 
agreed, "What good is common-sense? His talents would not help in earning 
money, let only three of us travel." 
  
After much pleading by the fourth Brahmin, they decide, "It will not be correct 
to behave like this to a dear friend, Let us take him along with us! We should 
also share a part of our earnings with him!" 
  
As decided, the four of them started travelling. As they were travelling through 
a jungle, they noticed the bones of a dead lion, lying on their way. 
  
One of them said, "Let us start using our scholarship! We have a dead lion in 
front of us. Let us test our scholarship, and try to bring life into it!" 
  
While the three Brahmins agreed, the fourth Brahmin did not like the idea. But 
his preference was ignored by the other three Brahmins, and they started 
holy rituals. 
  
One of the Brahmins collected the bones of the lion and using his 
scholarship, created a skeleton of the lion. 
  
Another Brahmin used his scholarship to cover the skeleton with flesh and 
skin. 
   
  
 
As the lifeless lion stood in front of them, the third Brahmin initiated the rituals 
to put life into the lion. 
  
The fourth Brahmin was alarmed, "O friends, if the lion comes to life, he will 
kill all of us! Please stop what you are doing!" 
  
The Brahmins ridiculed him, "After reaching so far, are we going to waste our 
knowledge? You say so, because you are jealous of our scholarship!" 
  
The fourth Brahmin knew there was no point in arguing with them. He 
pleaded, "Please give me a moment. I wish to climb a tree before you make 
use of you scholarship." 
  
He started climbing up a big tree, and could see from above the third Brahmin 
use his scholarship, to put life into the lion. 
  
As soon as the lion became lively, he noticed the three Brahmins, who were 
celebrating their successful implementation of their scholarship. 
  
The lion immediately pounced on them, and killed them. 
  
The fourth Brahmin could do nothing but wait till the lion had gone. Then, he 
climbed down the tree and returned home alone. 
  
The wise indeed say: 
Common sense is preferable to knowledge. 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
55. Four Learned Fools 
 
Four naive Brahmins, who were 
great friends, lived in a certain 
town. 
  
One day, they decided to study 
hard and acquire knowledge. They 
would then be able to make 
money. It was decided that they 
would require going to a different 
town to do that. 
 
So, they travelled to a new city, and joined a hermitage to further their study. 
For twelve years they studied very hard, and mastered many fields of 
knowledge. 
 
One day, they discussed, "Now that we have finally acquired sufficient 
knowledge in many branches of science, let us ask our Guru's permission to 
depart from this hermitage. We are finally prepared to earn money by 
applying our knowledge." 
  
They asked their Guru's permission, who blessed them for success. They 
then started to travel, with all the shastras (holy books of knowledge). After 
travelling for a while, they came across an intersection, where the path was 
divided into two different directions. 
  
They started pondering on which path they should take to further their travel. 
  
Meanwhile, a merchant's son had died in a nearby town. As they stood 
pondering, a huge funeral procession headed their way. The procession 
included several prominent people, and they were going to the cremation 
ground. 
  
Consulting the scriptures of the shastras, one of the Brahmins declared, "The 
right path to follow is the path taken by great men!" Thus, they decided to 
take the same path as that of the funeral procession. 
  
On reaching the cremation ground, the people in the funeral procession 
stopped, and initiated the funeral proceedings. Now, they started pondering 
what course of action they should take next. 
  
  
  
 
While pondering such, they saw a donkey nearby. Consulting the scriptures 
of the shastras, a Brahmin declared, "A true friend is one who stands by you 
on all occasions. Be the occasion joyous or sad!" 
  
Thus, they accepted the donkey as their true friend. They put their arms 
around the donkey's neck, adored and kissed him, after washing his hoofs 
with water. 
  
At this time, they observed a camel running towards them, from a distance. 
Quickly consulting their scriptures of the shastras, one of the Brahmins 
declared, "Righteousness marches rapidly!". Thus, they agreed that the 
camel marching quickly towards them must be righteousness incarnate, and 
nothing else. 
  
Another Brahmin, on consulting his scriptures declared, "A good man should 
always lead his friend to righteousness!" 
 
Thus, they stopped the approaching camel and introduced it with the donkey. 
Then, they tied the donkey to the camel in order to lead their friend to 
righteousness. The camel dragged the donkey, while continuing his journey. 
  
The donkey's master was a washerman, who saw the four Brahmins tie his 
donkey to the camel. He was angered by this, and ran after the Brahmins with 
a stick. 
  
On being chased, the four learned fools, ran for their lives and reached a 
river. They observed that a leaf of a holy tree was floating on the water of the 
river. 
  
One of the Brahmins declared, "Holiness carries one across the river of life!" 
He jumped at once, on the holy leaf to cross the river. Unable to swim, he 
immediately began to drown. 
  
When another Brahmin saw him being dragged by the river, he got into the 
river at once and caught him by the neck. But the currents of the river were 
very strong and he was not able to drag his friend to the bank of the river. He 
remembered from the scriptures, "When a wise man knows that total 
destruction is imminent, he would sacrifice half and work with the rest!" 
  
He immediately took out his sword, and cut his friend into half. He was then, 
able to drag him to the bank of the river. But, by that time he had already 
died. 
  
They regretted their friend's loss, and later the three remaining Brahmins 
continued their journey.  
  
 
After they wandered for some time, they reached a village. The villagers 
welcomed them in a very hospitable fashion, and offered them different 
houses to stay. The villagers decided that three different families will serve 
them with their dinner. 
  
One Brahmin was served with sweet noodles. He remembered from 
scriptures, "Long tactics will surely take a man to destruction!" Thus, he did 
not eat the food, and remained hungry throughout the night. 
  
Another Brahmin was served with a bowl of frothy soup, He remembered 
from scriptures, "Whatever is frothy and distended, does not last long!" Thus, 
he did not eat the food, and remained hungry throughout the night, too. 
  
The third Brahmin was served a tasty food with a hole in the middle. He 
remembered, "Defects are an imminent sign of approaching danger!" Thus, 
he did not eat the food, and remained hungry throughout the night, either. 
  
When the villagers came to know in the morning, that they did not have the 
dinners served for them, they laughed and ridiculed them. 
  
Angrily, the three remaining learned fools started to depart from the village. 
As they started their journey, the villagers went a long distance with them - all 
the time, ridiculing, laughing and mocking them on their way. 
  
The wise indeed say: 
Empty knowledge brings ridicule. 
 
  
  
 
56. Tale of Two Fishes and Frog 
Two large fishes, Sahasrabuddhi 
and Satabuddhi lived in a big 
pond, and were close friends with 
a frog called Ekabuddhi. They 
spent a lot of time together on 
the bank of the pond. 
  
One evening, as they were 
assembled on the bank of the 
pond, they saw a few fishermen 
approaching. They had nets and 
big baskets with them, which 
were full of fishes that they had 
caught. 
 
  
While passing by the pond, they noticed that the pond was full of fishes. One 
of them said to the others, "Let us come here tomorrow morning. This pond is 
not very deep, and is full of fishes. We have never caught fishes in this pond." 
 
They agreed to return the very next morning, and continued their journey 
homewards. 
  
The frog was depressed on hearing the fishermen and said, "O Friends, we 
should decide what to do, whether to run or hide. These fishermen will return 
tomorrow morning!" 
  
The fishes however did not care much. The first fish said, "O Friend, It is just 
mere talks of few passing fishermen. Don't worry, for they will not come. And, 
even if they do, I know innumerable tricky water movements. I shall save 
myself and my family with ease." 
  
The second fish joined, "I am as talented in tricky water movements as you! I 
will be able to save myself and my family too. I support your stand, for I will 
not abandon the home of our ancestors for the sake of some mere talk of few 
passing fishermen." 
  
But the frog was not convinced, he said, "My friends, my only talent is that I 
can foresee danger. You may stay, but I will leave with my family to some 
other pond before morning." 
  
  
  
 
The very next morning, the fishermen came and cast their nets all over the 
pond. They had a big haul, and caught many fishes, frogs, tortoises and 
crabs. 
  
Sahasrabuddhi and Satabuddhi tried hard to escape, but none of their tricks 
worked. They were caught, and when the fishermen dragged their net on the 
bank of the pond they were already dead. 
  
Being the largest of the fishes the fishermen caught, they proudly displayed 
Sahasrabuddhi and Satabuddhi, and carried them separately as they started 
homewards. 
  
Meanwhile, the frog, Ekabuddhi, had already found a well for shelter. Being 
worried and anxious, he came to the surface. But as he saw the fishermen 
departing with his friends, he became sad. 
  
He told his wife, "They were very talented, but lacked the only talent that was 
most important. As for me, I may have only one talent, but I swim happily with 
my family!" 
  
The wise indeed say: 
At the first hint of danger, act quickly to save yourself. 
 
  
  
 
57. Musical Donkey 
 
There lived a washer man’s 
donkey, whose name was 
Uddhata. 
  
During the day, the donkey would 
carry the washer man's bags, but 
during the night, he was set free 
to eat the green grass in a nearby 
field. 
  
However, instead of grazing in the nearby fields, he crept into nearby farms 
and ate vegetables of his choice. Before day-break it would come back to the 
washerman's house. 
 
One night, the donkey met a jackal while wandering in a nearby farm. They 
became good friends, and started meeting every night. 
  
The donkey, being fat, was able to break the fences of the farms. While he 
ate on the vegetable, the jackal would enter through the broken fence and ate 
the poultry on the farm. Before day-break, they would return to their 
respective home to meet again next night. This continued for many days. 
  
One night, the donkey said to the jackal, "Nephew, I feel like singing on nights 
like tonight, when the moon is full and beautiful. What Raaga (note 
combination) shall I sing?" 
  
The jackal cautioned, "Uncle, we are here to steal. Thieves should keep as 
quiet as possible. I may add, your voice is not as pleasant as you think, and 
sounds like conch being blown! Your voice can be heard over a long 
distance. It will awaken the farmers who are sleeping, and you will have us 
caught." 
  
The jackal assured, "Please uncle, eat as much as you like, and forget about 
singing!" 
  
This annoyed the donkey and he said, "Dear nephew, it is because you are a 
wild animal that you don't appreciate music. I shall sing a melodious Raaga. 
Wait till you hear it!" 
  
Observing that the donkey was determined to sing; the jackal did not risk 
staying there anymore. He said, "Uncle, if you must sing, please wait till I go 
outside the fence and keep a watch on the farmers." 
   
  
 
He ran outside the fence, and hid himself. Then, the donkey started to bray at 
the top of his voice. 
  
When the farmers heard the donkey braying, they could see easily in the full 
moon-lit farm that the donkey was in their farm. 
  
The angry farmers chased the donkey with sticks, and beat him so hard that 
he fell on the ground. Then, they tied a wooden mortar around his neck and 
let him go. 
  
When the donkey was returning through the broken fence, the jackal laughed, 
"Musical uncle! That was a great Raaga! I see the farmers have rewarded 
you with this necklace!" 
  
The wise indeed say: 
There is always a proper place and time for doing anything. 
 
  
  
 
58. Brahmin's Dream 
Swabhavakripna was a poor 
Brahmin who lived alone in a 
small village. He had no friends 
or relatives, and used to beg for 
alms for his living. He was also 
a miser, and kept whatever little 
food he received as alms in an 
earthen pot that he hung beside 
his bed. 
 
He kept a watch on the pot, and 
ate from the pot only when he 
was very hungry. 
 
 
One day, he received a large quantity of rice gruel (porridge). He filled his pot 
with the rice gruel, and ate the remaining. He was so happy to have his pot 
full; he could not take his eyes off the pot as he lay awake in his bed. 
 
After a long time, he fell asleep and started dreaming about the pot full of rice 
gruel. 
  
He dreamt that there was a famine in his village. He sold his pot full of rice 
gruel for hundred silver coins. With this money be bought a pair of goats. His 
goats gave kids in months and he traded all goats for some buffaloes and 
cows. 
  
Soon, even the buffaloes and cows gave kids, and they gave a lot of milk. 
  
He started trading milk and milk products like butter and curd in the market. 
This way, he became a very rich and popular man. 
  
He kept dreaming that he then bought some horses and a large rectangular 
house with four buildings. 
  
He became popular, and another wealthy Brahmin was so impressed that he 
offered his beautiful daughter for marriage. Soon after, they got married in a 
lavish ceremony. 
  
His wife gave birth to a son, who was named Soma Sharma. But his son was 
very naughty. He would play and make noise all day. 
  
  
  
 
One day, the Brahmin asked him to stop but he would not listen. Even his 
mother could not hear him shout as she was busy with her chores. 
Swabhavakripna became very angry, he kicked his wife. 
  
As he was in a dream, he kicked in air and his leg hit his earthen pot. The pot 
broke and all the rice gruel spilled down. This woke him up. 
  
At once, he realized that he had been dreaming. He also realized that all the 
rice gruel he had saved and was happily dreaming about was lost. He was 
shattered. 
  
The wise indeed say: 
One should not build castles in the air. 
 
  
  
 
59. Bird with Two Heads 
Once upon a time, there lived a 
great bird named Bharunda, on 
the banks of a lake. 
  
It was strange because he had 
two necks with two heads, but 
shared the common body. One 
day, as the bird was wandering, it 
found a delicious looking red-
golden fruit. 
 
One of the heads mumbled, "Oh, what a delicious looking fruit. I am lucky to 
have found it. I am sure the fruit is sent from heavens only for me". On saying 
so, it started eating the fruit with utmost pleasure. While eating, it kept on 
praising how it was the most delicious fruit he had ever eaten. 
 
Hearing and seeing all this, the other head requested, "Oh dear, please also 
allow me to taste the fruit that you are praising with all your heart". 
  
The first head did not want to share it, so it laughed and said, "We share the 
same stomach. Whoever amongst us eats the fruit, it goes to the same 
stomach. It makes no difference on who eats the fruit. Moreover, since I am 
the one who found this fruit in the first place, I have the right to eat it myself." 
  
This selfishness of the first head hurt him very much, and he went silent with 
disappointment on hearing the first head's reply. 
  
Few days later, as they were wandering the second head found some fruits. 
 
The fruits were from a poisonous tree. He declared to the first head, "You are 
a deceitful person. The other day you had insulted me by not sharing the 
delicious fruit. Now I am going to eat this fruit and avenge your insult". 
  
The first head pleaded, "Please don't eat this fruit, it is a poisonous one. We 
share the same stomach. If you eat it, we will both suffer" 
  
Mocking at the first head, the second head replied, "Shut up! Since I am the 
one who found this fruit in the first place, I have the right to eat it myself". 
  
  
  
 
Knowing what would happen, the first head began to cry. The second head 
ate the poisonous fruit without bothering the first head's requests. As a 
consequence of this action, as soon as the poison reached the stomach, the 
bird severely suffered. 
  
The wise indeed say: 
Union is strength. 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
60. Unforgiving Monkey 
Chandra was a king, whose sons 
kept a group of monkeys as pets. 
  
These monkeys were treated as 
royal pets, and were provided 
with the choicest of foods and 
the best of care. As they did not 
have much to do, they had 
become fat. 
  
The chief of these monkeys was 
very wise. They followed great 
philosophers and was learned in 
many sciences.  
 
  
He always tried to teach the other monkeys, but they had become too 
absorbed in their lavish lives to follow much of his teachings. 
 
On the other hand, the princes also had two strong rams (billy goats), which 
used to draw the carriage used by the young princess. 
  
One of the rams was a glutton, and would creep into the kitchen whenever he 
could and eat whatever he could get there. This made the cooks very angry, 
and they would keep a watch. The cooks would throw anything they could lay 
their hand on, to hit the ram, when he would be near the kitchen. 
  
Noticing the cooks trying to hit him with sticks, earthen pots, copper pans and 
anything they found handy, the chief of the monkeys thought, "This behaviour 
could lead to accidents, and this entire city may perish. What if they threw 
something with fire?" 
  
The chief of monkeys summoned the other monkey and said, "The behaviour 
of the cooks towards the ram can lead to some mishap any day, and we may 
well be on the losing side, if that is to happen. Let us get away from here, 
before some accident is to happen." 
  
But, the other monkeys were enjoying their lavish treatment, and did not go 
back to the jungle. They refused to heed the chief's warnings, and decided to 
stay. They assumed that the chief was getting old, and having all types of 
weird thoughts. 
  
  
  
 
Thus, the chief of monkeys decided to leave alone. He said, "You are more 
fools than crazy not to foresee the danger. I shall leave here, as I value life 
more than the abundant foods served here!" 
  
After the chief of monkey had departed to the jungle alone, one day, the ram 
entered the kitchen and ate some food that was being organized to be served 
to the king. 
  
One of the cooks got very angry, and unable to get anything else handy, 
threw a half-burnt log from the oven. The log hit the ram. As the ram's body 
was covered with wool, it instantly caught fire. In the pain of fire on him, the 
ram ran to the stable. The dry grass for the horses caught fire, and in a 
moment the whole stable was engulfed in fire. 
 
There was a pandemonium, and by the time, the fire was extinguished by the 
palace workers, the horses suffered grave burnings. When the news reached 
the king, he was very depressed that such a thing had happened to his 
favourite horses, and summoned veterinary surgeons to prescribe him 
remedy. 
  
After referring many scriptures, the veterinary surgeons advised, "O King, the 
wounds caused by fire will recover fast, if they are applied with monkey's fat." 
  
Thus, the king ordered all the pet monkeys be caught, and killed immediately. 
The fat from their bodies were then used to treat the horse's wounds. 
  
When this news reached the chief of the monkeys, he was very sad. He 
thought, "The monkeys were foolish not to heed the warnings, but the king is 
wicked for doing this to his pets. I will make him pay for his actions!" 
  
He had not eaten food or drink water for several days as he was heart-
broken. Absent-mindedly, he came to a lake full of beautiful lotus. He was 
thirsty, and decided to drink some water. As he came near the lake, he 
noticed that there were many footprints of both men and animals, that led to 
the lake, but not a single footprint led away from the lake. 
  
He became aware, and concluded there must be something wrong in this 
beautifully decorated lake. He fetched some hollow stems of lotus plant 
nearby, and using them as a pipe, drank water from a distance. 
  
As he was doing so, a monster emerged from the lake. He had a necklace of 
jewels around his neck. He said, "I am a monster who lives in this lake. 
Whoever enters this lake to bath or drink water, ends up in my tummy. For so 
many years, I have not seen anybody as wise as you! You drink water from 
the lake, but maintain a distance where I cannot touch you. I am so pleased 
with you, that I shall grant any wish you may want!"  
  
 
The chief of monkey immediately remembered that he had a revenge to take, 
and said, "Tell me, how many can you eat? I have a certain king as my 
enemy. If you give me your necklace, I shall use it to persuade the king and 
his men to enter the lake." 
  
The monster replied, "If they enter the lake, I can eat thousands of them. Go 
ahead and bring as many as you can!" 
  
The chief of monkey wore the necklace in his neck and jumped from tree to 
tree to reach the palace as early as possible. He went straight into the king's 
court. 
  
When the king and everybody else saw the chief of monkeys wearing a 
beautiful necklace of jewels, they became curious. They asked the chief of 
monkeys all sort of questions. 
  
The chief of monkey said to the king, "O king, while wandering in the jungle, I 
have come across a large treasure that Kuber (God of treasures) has hidden. 
It is secretly hidden inside a lake. Anyone, who takes a bath in the lake on a 
Sunday, can have as much treasure as he can carry. This necklace is nothing 
compared to the other treasures there! The diamonds in the lake would even 
put the sun to shame!" 
  
When the king heard this, he said, "Hey Monkey Chief, if this lake really 
exists, please take us to it. I will come to see it myself, and even bring 
everybody in the palace along with me." 
  
It was decided, and in the early morning of the very next Sunday, the king 
and the chief of the monkeys set to travel inside the jungle. They were 
followed by the princes, queens, ministers, household workers and everybody 
else in the palace. 
  
When they reached the place, everybody was awe-struck to see the lake full 
of lotus. The chief of monkeys said, "Everybody should enter the lake at the 
same time, or only the first few will receive the blessings. As for you, my king, 
you should wait. I will show you a special place to enter the lake after they 
have gone into the lake." 
  
The greedy king and everybody else followed his instructions and got into the 
lake. One by one, they started to disappear. The king kept anxiously waiting 
for them to return with treasures. 
  
When his people and relatives did not come out of the lake after a long time, 
the king asked, "O Monkey Chief, why do they not come out? Why is it that 
they take so long time?"  
  
 
The chief of the monkeys jumped to the top of a tree and replied, "O wicked 
king, a monster lives in this very lake that has eaten all your court members 
and relatives. I have now killed all your family, as you have killed mine. It is 
not a sin to return evil for evil deeds." 
  
He continued, "I have saved you, for you were once my master! You may 
return to your palace, empty-handed and alone." 
  
Thus, the king returned to his palace after losing all his relatives and 
household members. 
  
The wise indeed say: 
Greed surely brings disaster and destruction in the end. 
 
